Bibliographic and Editorial Note.

The text of this version is taken from a reprint of the sixth
(1652) edition, by Chatto and Windus, London, 1883.
Translations from the Latin -- Those in round brackets ( . . )
were footnotes in the original; those in square brackets
[ . . ] are the work of the Ex-Classics Project.
Footnotes in Latin (of which there were a great many) have
been omitted.
Accents have been removed from Latin, in accordance with
modern practice.
Greek has been transliterated according to the following
scheme:
alpha:   a
beta:    b
gamma:   g
delta:   d
espilon: e
zeta:    z
eta:     e
theta:   th
iota:    i
kappa:   k
lambda:  l
mu:      m
nu:      n
xi:      x
omicron: o
pi:      p
rho:     r
sigma:   s
tau:     t
upsilon: y
phi:     ph
chi:     ch
psi:     ps
omega:   o

The glossary is by the Ex-Classics Project

Title Page

THE
ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY
WHAT IT IS
WITH ALL THE KINDS, CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, PROGNOSTICS, AND
SEVERAL CURES OF IT
IN THREE PARTITIONS; WITH THEIR SEVERAL SECTIONS, MEMBERS,
AND SUBSECTIONS, PHILOSOPHICALLY, MEDICINALLY, HISTORICALLY
OPENED AND CUT UP
BY DEMOCRITUS JUNIOR
[ROBERT BURTON]
WITH A SATIRICAL PREFACE, CONDUCING TO THE FOLLOWING
DISCOURSE



Dedication

HONORATISSIMO DOMINO,
NON MINVS VIRTUTE SUA, QUAM GENERIS SPLENDORE,
ILLVSTRISSIMO,
GEORGIO BERKLEIO,
MILITI DE BALNEO, BARONI DE BERKLEY, MOUBREY, SEGRAVE,
D. DE BRUSE,
DOMINO SUO MULTIS NOMINIBUS OBSERVANDO,
HANC SUAM
MELANCHOLIAe ANATOMEN,
JAM SEXTO REVISAM, D. D.
DEMOCRITUS JUNIOR.
[To the most honourable Lord, illustrious not less for his
virtue than for his splendid ancestry, George Berkely, Knight
of the Bath, Baron of Berkley, Moubrey, Seagrave, Lord of
Bruse, with respect for his many titles, is dedicated this
ANATOMY of MELANCHOLY, sixth edition. Democritus Junior]



ADVERTISEMENT.


THE work now restored to public notice has had an
extraordinary fate. At the time of its original publication
it obtained a great celebrity, which continued more than half
a century. During that period few books were more read, or
more deservedly applauded. It was the delight of the learned,
the solace of the indolent, and the refuge of the uninformed.
It passed through at least eight editions, by which the
bookseller, as Wood records, got an estate; and,
notwithstanding the objection sometimes opposed against it,
of a quaint style, and too great an accumulation of
authorities, the fascination of its wit, fancy, and sterling
sense, have borne down all censures, and extorted praise from
the first writers in the English language. The grave Johnson
has praised it in the warmest terms, and the ludicrous Sterne
has interwoven many parts of it into his own popular
performance. Milton did not disdain to build two of his
finest poems on it; and a host of inferior writers have
embellished their works with beauties not their own, culled
from a performance which they had not the justice even to
mention. Change of times, and the frivolity of fashion,
suspended, in some degree, that fame which had lasted near a
century; and the succeeding generation affected indifference
towards an author, who at length was only looked into by the
plunderers of literature, the poachers in obscure volumes.
The plagiarisms of Tristram Shandy, so successfully brought
to light by Dr. Ferriar, at length drew the attention of the
public towards a writer, who, though then little known,
might, without impeachment of modesty, lay claim to every
mark of respect; and inquiry proved, beyond a doubt, that the
calls of justice had been little attended to by others, as
well as the facetious Yorick. Wood observed, more than a
century ago, that several authors had unmercifully stolen
matter from BURTON without any acknowledgment. The time,
however, at length arrived, when the merits of the Anatomy of
Melancholy were to receive their due praise. The book was
again sought for and read, and again it became an applauded
performance. Its excellencies once more stood confessed, in
the increased price which every copy offered for sale
produced; and the increased demand pointed out the necessity
of a new edition. This is now presented to the public in a
manner not disgraceful to the memory of the author; and the
publisher relies with confidence, that so valuable a
repository of amusement and information, will continue to
hold the rank to which it has been restored, firmly supported
by its own merit, and safe from the influence and blight of
any future caprices of fashion. To open its valuable
mysteries to those who have not had the advantage of a
classical education, translations of the countless quotations
from ancient writers which occur in the work, are now for the
first time given, and obsolete orthography is in all
instances modernised.



MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.


ROBERT BURTON was the son of Ralph Burton, of an ancient and
genteel family at Lindley, in Leicestershire, and was born
there on the 8th of February, 1576. [1] He received the first
rudiments of learning at the free school of Sutton Coldfield,
in Warwickshire, [2] from whence he was, at the age of
seventeen, in the long vacation, 1593, sent to Brazen Nose
College, in the condition of a commoner, where he made a
considerable progress in logic and philosophy. In 1599 he was
elected student of Christ Church, and, for form sake, was put
under the tuition of Dr. John Bancroft, afterwards Bishop of
Oxford. In 1614 he was admitted to the reading of the
Sentences, and on the 29th of November, 1616, had the
vicarage of St. Thomas, in the west suburb of Oxford,
conferred on him by the dean and canons of Christ Church,
which, with the rectory of Segrave, in Leicestershire, given
to him in the year 1636, by George, Lord Berkeley, he kept,
to use the words of the Oxford antiquary, with much ado to
his dying day. He seems to have been first beneficed at
Walsby, in Lincolnshire, through the munificence of his noble
patroness, Frances, Countess Dowager of Exeter, but resigned
the same, as he tells us, for some special reasons. At his
vicarage he is remarked to have always given the sacrament in
wafers. Wood's character of him is, that "he was an exact
mathematician, a curious calculator of nativities, a general
read scholar, a thorough-paced philologist, and one that
understood the surveying of lands well. As he was by many
accounted a severe student, a devourer of authors, a
melancholy and humorous person; so by others, who knew him
well, a person of great honesty, plain dealing and charity. I
have heard some of the ancients of Christ Church often say,
that his company was very merry, facetious, and juvenile; and
no man in his time did surpass him for his ready and
dexterous interlarding his common discourses among them with
verses from the poets, or sentences from classic authors;
which being then all the fashion in the University, made his
company the more acceptable." He appears to have been a
universal reader of all kinds of books, and availed himself
of his multifarious studies in a very extraordinary manner.
From the information of Hearne, we lean that John Rouse, the
Bodleian librarian, furnished him with choice books for the
prosecution of his work. The subject of his labour and
amusement, seems to have been adopted from the infirmities of
his own habit and constitution. Mr. Granger says, "He
composed this book with a view of relieving his own
melancholy, but increased it to such a degree, that nothing
could make him laugh, but going to the bridge-foot and
hearing the ribaldry of the barge-men, which rarely failed to
throw him into a violent fit of laughter. Before be was
overcome with this horrid disorder, he, in the intervals of
his vapours, was esteemed one of the most facetious
companions in the University."

His residence was chiefly at Oxford; where, in his chamber in
Christ Church College, he departed this life, at or very near
the time which he had some years before foretold, from the
calculation of his own nativity, and which, says Wood, "being
exact, several of the students did not forbear to whisper
among themselves, that rather than there should be a mistake
in the calculation, he sent up his soul to heaven through a
slip about his neck." Whether this suggestion is founded in
truth, we have no other evidence than an obscure hint in the
epitaph hereafter inserted, which was written by the author
himself; a short time before his death. His body, with due
solemnity, was buried near that of Dr. Robert Weston, in the
north aisle which joins next to the choir of the Cathedral of
Christ Church, on the 27th of January, 1639-40. Over his
grave was soon after erected a comely monument, on the upper
pillar of the said aisle, with his bust, painted to the life.
On the right hand is the following calculation of his
nativity:

<Astrological diagram>

and under the bust, this inscription of his own composition:-
-

Paucis notus, paucioribus ignotus,
Hic jacet Democritus junior
Cui vitam dedit et mortem
Melancholia.
Ob. 8 Id. Jan. A. C. MDCXXXIX.


[Little known, and even less forgiven, here lies Democritus
Junior, who gave his life and death to Melancholy. Died 9th
January, 1639. (1640 by modern reckoning)]

Arms:-- Azure on a bend O. between three dogs' heads O. a
crescent G.


A few months before his death, he made his will, of which the
following is a copy:

EXTRACTED FROM THE REGISTRY OF THE PREROGATIVE COURT OF
CANTERBURY.


In Nomine Dei Amen. August 15th One thousand six hundred
thirty nine because there be so many casualties to which our
life is subject besides quarrelling and contention which
happen to our Successors after our Death by reason of
unsettled Estates I Robert Burton Student of Christchurch
Oxon. though my means be but small have thought good by this
my last Will and Testament to dispose of that little which I
have and being at this present I thank God in perfect health
of Bodie and Mind and if this Testament be not so formal
according to the nice and strict terms of Law and other
Circumstances peradventure required of which I am ignorant I
desire howsoever this my Will may be accepted and stand good
according to my true Intent and meaning First I bequeath
Animam Deo Corpus Terrae [my soul to God my body to the
earth] whensoever it shall please God to call me I give my
Land in Higham which my good Father Ralphe Burton of Lindly
in the County of Leicester Esquire gave me by Deed of Gift
and that which I have annexed to that Farm by purchase since,
now leased for thirty eight pounds per Ann. to mine Elder
Brother William Burton of Lindly Esquire during his life and
after him to his heirs I make my said Brother William
likewise mine Executor as well as paying such Annuities and
Legacies out of my Lands and Goods as are hereafter specified
I give to my nephew Cassibilan Burton twenty pounds Annuity
per Ann. out of my Land in Higham during his life to be paid
at two equall payments at our Lady Day in Lent and Michaelmas
or if he be not paid within fourteen Days after the said
Feasts to distrain on any part of the Ground on or any of my
Lands of Inheritance Item I give to my sister Katherine
Jackson during her life eight pounds per Ann. Annuity to be
paid at the two Feasts equally as above said or else to
distrain on the Ground if she be not paid after fourteen days
at Lindly as the other some is out of the said Land Item I
give to my Servant John Upton the Annuity of Forty Shillings
out of my said Farme during his life (if till then my
Servant) to be paid on Michaelmas day in Lindley each year or
else after fourteen days to distrain Now for my goods I thus
dispose them First I give an Cth pounds to Christ Church in
Oxford where I have so long lived to buy five pounds Lands
per Ann. to be Yearly bestowed on Books for the Library Item
I give an hundredth pound to the University Library of Oxford
to be bestowed to purchase five pound Land per Ann. to be
paid out Yearly on Books as Mrs. Brooks formerly gave an
hundred pounds to buy Land to the same purpose and the Rent
to the same use I give to my Brother George Burton twenty
pounds and my watch I give to my Brother Ralph Burton five
pounds Item I give to the Parish of Seagrave in
Leicestershire where I am now Rector ten pounds to be given
to certain Feoffees to the perpetual good of the said Parish
Oxon item I give to my Niece Eugenia Burton One hundredth
pounds Item I give to my Nephew Richard Burton now Prisoner
in London an hundredth pound to redeem him Item I give to the
Poor of Higham Forty Shillings where my Land is to the Poor
of Nuneaton where I was once a Grammar Scholar three pound to
my Cousin Purfey of Wadlake [Wadley] my Cousin Purfey of
Calcott my Cousin Hales of Coventry my Nephew Bradshaw of
Orton twenty shillings a piece for a small remembrance to Mr.
Whitehall Rector of Cherkby myne own Chamber Fellow twenty
shillings I desire my Brother George and my Cosen Purfey of
Calcott to be the Overseers of this part of my Will I give
moreover five pounds to make a small Monument for my Mother
where she is buried in London to my Brother Jackson forty
shillings to my servant John Upton forty shillings besides
his former Annuity if he be my Servant till I die if he be
till then my Servant -- ROBERT BURTON -- Charles Russell
Witness -- John Pepper Witness.


An Appendix to this my Will if I die in Oxford or whilst I am
of Christ Church and with good Mr. Paynes August the
Fifteenth 1639.


I Give to Mr. Doctor Fell Dean of Christ Church Forty
Shillings to the Eight Canons twenty Shillings a piece as a
small remembrance to the poor of St. Thomas parish Twenty
Shillings to Brasenose Library five pounds to Mr. Rowse of
Oriell Colledge twenty Shillings to Mr. Heywood xxs. to Dr.
Metcalfe xxs. to Mr. Sherley xxs. If I have any Books the
University Library hath not, let them take them If I have any
Books our own Library hath not, let them take them I give to
Mrs. Fell all my English Books of Husbandry one excepted        
to her Daughter Mrs. Katherine Fell my Six Pieces of Silver
Plate and six Silver Spoons to Mrs Iles my Gerards Herball to
Mrs. Morris my Country Farme Translated out of French 4. and
all my English Physick Books  to Mr. Whistler the Recorder of
Oxford I give twenty shillings to all my fellow Students Mrs
of Arts a Book in fol. or two a piece as Master Morris
Treasurer or Mr Dean shall appoint whom I request to be the
Overseer of this Appendix and give him for his pains Atlas
Geografer and Ortelius Theatrum Mond' I give to John Fell the
Dean's Son Student my Mathematical Instruments except my two
Crosse Staves which I give to my Lord of Donnol if he be then
of the House To Thomas Iles Doctor Iles his Son Student
Saluntch on Paurrhelia and Lucian's Works in 4 Tomes If any
books be left let my Executors dispose of them with all such
Books as are written with my own hands and half my Melancholy
Copy for Crips hath the other half  To Mr. Jones Chaplin and
Chanter my Surveying Books and Instruments To the Servants of
the House Forty Shillings ROB. BURTON -- Charles Russell
Witness -- John Pepper Witness -- This Will was shewed to me
by the Testator and acknowledged by him some few days before
his death to be his last Will Ita Testor John Morris S Th D.
Prebendari' Ecci Chri' Oxon Feb. 3, 1639.

Probatum fuit Testamentum suprascriptum, &c. 11° 1640
Juramento Willmi Burton Fris' et Executoris cui &c. de bene
et fideliter administrand. &c. coram Mag'ris Nathanaele
Stephens Rectore Eccl. de Drayton, et Edwardo Farmer,
Clericis, vigore commissionis, &c.

The only work our author executed was that now reprinted,
which probably was the principal employment of his life. Dr.
Ferriar says, it was originally published in the year 1617;
but this is evidently a mistake; [3] the first edition was
that printed in 4to, 1621, a copy of which is at present in
the collection of John Nichols, Esq., the indefatigable
illustrator of the History of Leicestershire; to whom, and to
Isaac Reed, Esq., of Staple Inn, this account is greatly
indebted for its accuracy. The other impressions of it were
in 1624, 1628, 1632, 1638, 1651-2, 1660, and 1676, which
last, in the title-page, is called the eighth edition.

The copy from which the present is re-printed, is that of
1651-2: at the conclusion of which is the following address:

"TO THE READER.


"Be pleased to know (Courteous Reader) that since the last
Impression of this Book, the ingenious Author of it is
deceased, leaving a Copy of it exactly corrected, with
several considerable Additions by his own hand; this Copy he
committed to my care and custody, with directions to have
those Additions inserted in the next Edition; which in order
to his command, and the Publicke Good, is faithfully
performed in this last Impression."
H.C. (i. e. HEN. CRIPPS.)
The following testimonies of various authors will serve to
show the estimation in which this work has been held:--


"The ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY, wherein the author hath piled up
variety of much excellent learning. Scarce any book of
philology in our land hath, in so short a time, passed so
many editions." -- Fuller's Worthies, fol. 16.


"'Tis a book so full of variety of reading, that gentlemen
who have lost their time, and are put to a push for
invention, may furnish themselves with matter for common or
scholastical discourse and writing." -- Wood's Athenae
Oxoniensis, vol. i. p. 628. 2d edit.


"If you never saw BURTON UPON MELANCHOLY, printed 1676, I
pray look into it, and read the ninth page of his Preface,
'Democritus to the Reader.' There is something there which
touches the point we are upon; but I mention the author to
you, as the pleasantest, the most learned, and the most full
of sterling sense. The wits of Queen Anne's reign, and the
beginning of George the First, were not a little beholden to
him;"  -- Archbishop Herring's Letters, 12mo, 1777. p. 149.


"BURTON'S ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY, he (Dr. Johnson) said, was
the only book that ever took him out of bed two hours sooner
than he wished to rise." -- Boswell's Life of Johnson, vol.
i. p. 580, 8vo. edit.


" BURTON'S ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY is a valuable book," said
Dr. Johnson. "It is, perhaps, overloaded with quotation. But
there is great spirit and great power in what Burton says
when he writes from his own mind." ---Ibid. vol. ii. p. 325.


"It will be no detraction from the powers of Milton's
original genius and invention, to remark, that he seems to
have borrowed the subject of L'Allegro and Il Penseroso
together with some particular thoughts, expressions, and
rhymes, more especially the idea of a contrast between these
two dispositions, from a forgotten poem prefixed to the first 
edition of BURTON'S ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY, entitled, 'The
Author's Abstract of Melancholy; or A Dialogue between
Pleasure and Pain.' Here pain is melancholy. It was written,
as I conjecture, about the year 1600. I will make no apology
for abstracting and citing as much of this poem as will be
sufficient to prove, to a discerning reader, how far it had
taken possession of Milton's mind. The measure will appear to
be the same; and that our author was at least an attentive
reader of Burton's book, may be already concluded from the
traces of resemblance which I have incidentally noticed in
passing through the L'Allegro and Il Penseroso." -- After
extracting the lines, Mr. Warton adds, "as to the very
elaborate work to which these visionary verses are no
unsuitable introduction, the writer's variety of learning,
his quotations from scarce and curious books, his pedantry
sparkling with rude wit and shapeless elegance, miscellaneous
matter, intermixture of agreeable tales and illustrations,
and, perhaps, above all, the singularities of his feelings,
clothed in an uncommon quaintness of style, have contributed
to render it, even to modern readers, a valuable repository
of amusement and information.."-- Warton's Milton. 2d. edit.
p. 94


"THE ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY is a book which has been
universally read and admired. This work is, for the most
part, what the author himself styles it, 'a cento;' but it is
a very ingenious one. His quotations, which abound in every
page, are pertinent; but if he had made more use of his
invention and less of his commonplace-book, his work would
perhaps have been more valuable than it is. He is generally
free from the affected language and ridiculous metaphors
which disgrace most of the books of his time.' -- Granger's
Biographical History.


"BURTON'S ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY, a book once the favourite of
the learned and the witty, and a source of surreptitious
learning, though written on a regular plan, consists chiefly 
of quotations: the author has honestly termed it a cento. He
collects, under every division, the opinions of a multitude
of writers, without regard to chronological order, and has
too often the modesty to decline the interposition of his own
sentiments. Indeed the bulk of his materials generally
overwhelms him. In the course of his folio be has contrived
to treat a great variety of topics, that seem very loosely
connected with the general subject; and, like Bayle, when he
starts a favourite train of quotations, he does not scruple
to let the digression outrun the principal question. Thus,
from the doctrines of religion to military discipline, from
inland navigation to the morality of dancing-schools, every
thing is discussed and determined." -- Ferriar's
Illustrations of Sterne, p. 58.


"The archness which BURTON displays occasionally, and his
indulgence of playful digressions from the most serious
discussions, often give his style an air of familiar
conversation, notwithstanding the laborious collections which
supply his text He was capable of writing excellent poetry,
but he seems to have cultivated this talent too little. The
English verses prefixed to his book, which possess beautiful
imagery, and great sweetness of versification, have been
frequently published. His Latin elegiac verses addressed to
his book, shew a very agreeable turn for raillery." -- Ibid.
p. 58.


"When the force of the subject opens his own vein of prose,
we discover valuable sense and brilliant expression. Such is
his account of the first feelings of melancholy persons,
written, probably, from his own experience." --- ibid. p. 60.


"During a pedantic age, like that in which BURTON'S
production appeared, it must have been eminently serviceable
to writers of many descriptions. Hence the unlearned might
furnish themselves with appropriate scraps of Greek and
Latin, whilst men of letters would find their inquiries
shortened, by knowing where they might look for what both
ancients and moderns have advanced on the subject of human
passions. I confess my inability to point out any other
English author who has so largely dealt in apt and original
quotation." ---Manuscript note of the late George Steevens,
Esq., in his copy of THE ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY.
NOTES:

1. His elder brother was William Burton, the Leicestershire
antiquary, born 24th August, 1575, educated at Sutton
Coldfield, admitted commoner, or gentleman commoner, of
Brazen Nose College, 1591; at the Inner Temple, 20th May,
1593; B.A. 22nd June, 1594; and afterwards a barrister and
reporter in the Court of Common Pleas. "But his natural
genius," says Wood, "leading him to the studies of heraldry,
genealogies, and antiquities, he became excellent in those
obscure and intricate matters; and, look upon him as a
gentleman, was accounted, by all that knew him, to be the
best of his time for those studies, as may appear by his
'Description of Leicestershire.'" His weak constitution not 
permitting him to follow business, he retired into the
country, and his greatest work, "The Description of
Leicestershire," was published in folio, 1622. He died at
Falde, after suffering much in the civil war, 6th April,
1645, and was buried in the parish church belonging thereto,
called Hanbury.

2: This is Wood's account. His will says, Nuneaton; but a
passage in this work mentions Sutton Coldfield; probably he
may have been at both schools.

3:  Originating, perhaps, in a note, p. 448, 6th edit., in
which a book is quoted as having been "printed at Paris 1624,
seven years after Burton's first edition." As, however, the
editions after that of 1621, are regularly marked in
succession to the eighth, printed in 1676, there seems very
little reason to doubt that, in the note above alluded to,
either 1624 has been a misprint for 1628, or seven years for
three years. The numerous typographical errata in other parts
of the work strongly aid this latter supposition.



DEMOCRITUS JUNIOR TO HIS BOOK

PARAPHRASTIC METRICAL TRANSLATION.

Go forth my book into the open day;
Happy, if made so by its garish eye.
O'er earth's wide surface take thy vagrant way.
To imitate thy master's genius try.
The graces three, the Muses nine salute,
Should those who love them try to con thy lore.
The country, city seek, grand thrones to boot,
With gentle courtesy humbly bow before.
Should nobles gallant, soldiers frank and brave
Seek thy acquaintance, hail their first advance:
From twitch of care thy pleasant vein may save,
May laughter cause or wisdom give perchance.
Some surly Cato, Senator austere,
Haply may wish to peep into thy book:
Seem very nothing -- tremble and revere:
No forceful eagles, butterflies e'er look.
They love not thee: of them then little seek,
And wish for readers triflers like thyself.
Of ludeful matron watchful catch the beck,
Or gorgeous countess full of pride and pelf.
They may say "pish!" and frown, and yet read on:
Cry odd, and silly, coarse, and yet amusing.
Should dainty damsels seek thy page to con,
Spread thy best stores: to them be ne'er refusing:
Say, fair one, master loves thee dear as life;
Would he were here to gaze on thy sweet look.
Should known or unknown student, free'd from strife
Of logic and the schools, explore my book:
Cry mercy critic, and thy book withhold:
Be some few errors pardon'd though observ'd:
An humble author to implore makes bold.
Thy kind indulgence, even undeserv'd,
Should melancholy wight or pensive lover,
Courtier, snug cit, or carpet knight so trim
Our blossoms cull, he'll find himself in clover,
Gain sense from precept, laughter from our whim.
Should learned leech with solemn air unfold
Thy leaves, beware, be civil, and be wise:
Thy volume many precepts sage may hold,
His well fraught head may find no trifling prize.
Should crafty lawyer trespass on our ground,
Caitiffs avaunt! disturbing tribe away!
Unless (white crow) an honest one be found;
He'll better, wiser go for what we say.
Should some ripe scholar, gentle and benign,
With candour, care, and judgment thee peruse;
Thy faults to kind oblivion he'll consign;
Nor to thy merit will his praise refuse.
Thou may'st be searched for polish'd words and verse;
By flippant spouter, emptiest of praters:
Tell him to seek them in some mawkish verse:
My periods all are rough as nutmeg graters.
The doggrel poet, wishing thee to read,
Reject not; let him glean thy jests and stories.
His brother I, of lowly sembling breed:
Apollo grants to few Parnassian glories.
Menac'd by critic with sour furrowed brow,
Momus or Troilus or Scotch reviewer:
Ruffle your heckle, grin and growl and vow:
Ill-natured foes you thus will find the fewer.
When foul-mouth'd senseless railers cry thee down,
Reply not; fly, and show the rogues thy stern:
They are not worthy even of a frown:
Good taste or breeding they can never learn;
Or let them clamour, turn a callous ear,
As though in dread of some harsh donkey's bray,
If chid by censor, friendly though severe,
To such explain and turn thee not away.
Thy vein, says he perchance, is all too free;
Thy smutty language suits not learned pen:
Reply, Good Sir, throughout, the context see;
Thought chastens thought; so prithee judge again.
Besides, although my master's pen may wander
Through devious paths, by which it ought not stray;
His life is pure, beyond the breath of slander:
So pardon grant; 'tis merely but his way.
Some rugged ruffian makes a hideous rout --
Brandish thy cudgel, threaten him to baste;
The filthy fungus far from thee cast out;
Such noxious banquets never suit my taste.
Yet, calm and cautious moderate thy ire,
Be ever courteous should the case allow --
Sweet malt is ever made by gentle fire:
Warm to thy friends, give all a civil bow.
Even censure sometimes teaches to improve,
Slight frosts have often cured too rank a crop,
So, candid blame my spleen shall never move,
For skilful gard'ners wayward branches lop.
Go then, my book, and bear my words in mind;
Guides safe at once, and pleasant them you'll find.



THE ARGUMENT OF THE FRONTISPIECE.

These verses refer to the Frontispiece, which is divided into
ten compartments that are here severally explained.

Ten distinct Squares here seen apart,
Are joined in one by Cutter's art.

I.
Old Democritus under a tree,
Sits on a stone with book on knee;
About him hang there many features,
Of Cats, Dogs and such like creatures,
Of which he makes anatomy,
The seat of black choler to see,
Over his head appears the sky,
And Saturn Lord of melancholy.

II.
To the left a landscape of Jealousy,
Presents itself unto thine eye.
A Kingfisher, a Swan, an Hern,
Two fighting-cocks you may discern,
Two roaring Bulls each other hie,
To assault concerning venery.
Symbols are these; I say no more,
Conceive the rest by that's afore.

III.
The next of solitariness,
A Portraiture doth well express,
By sleeping dog, cat: Buck and Doe,
Hares, Conies in the desart go:
Bats, Owls the shady bowers over,
In melancholy darkness hover.
Mark well: If't be not as it should be,
Blame the bad Cutter, and not me.

IV.
I'th' under column there doth stand
Inamorato with folded hand;
Down hangs his head, terse and polite,
Some ditty sure he doth indite.
His lute and books about him lie,
As symptoms of his vanity.
If this do not enough disclose,
To paint him, take thyself by th' nose.

V.
Hypocondriacus leans on his arm,
Wind in his side doth him much harm,
And troubles him full sore, God knows,
Much pain he hath and many woes.
About him pots and glasses lie,
Newly brought from's Apothecary.
This Saturn's aspects signify,
You see them portray'd in the sky.

VI.
Beneath them kneeling on his knee,
A superstitious man you see:
He fasts, prays, on his idol fixt,
Tormented hope and fear betwixt:
For hell perhaps he takes more pain,
Than thou dost heaven itself to gain.
Alas poor soul, I pity thee,
What stars incline thee so to be?

VII.
But see the madman rage downright
With furious looks, a ghastly sight.
Naked in chains bound doth he lie,
And roars amain he knows not why!
Observe him; for as in a glass,
Thine angry portraiture it was.
His picture keeps still in thy presence;
'Twixt him and thee, there's no difference.

VIII, IX.
Borage and Hellebor fill two scenes,
Sovereign plants to purge the veins
Of melancholy, and cheer the heart,
Of those black fumes which make it smart;
To clear the brain of misty fogs,
Which dull our senses, and Soul clogs.
The best medicine that e'er God made
For this malady, if well assay'd.

X.
Now last of all to fill a place,
Presented is the Author's face;
And in that habit which he wears,
His image to the world appears.
His mind no art can well express,
That by his writings you may guess.
It was not pride, nor yet vain glory,
(Though others do it commonly,)
Made him do this: if you must know,
The Printer would needs have it so.
Then do not frown or scoff at it,
Deride not, or detract a whit.
For surely as thou dost by him,
He will do the same again.
Then look upon't, behold and see,
As thou like'st it, so it likes thee.
And I for it will stand in view,
Thine to command, Reader, adieu.



THE AUTHOR'S ABSTRACT OF MELANCHOLY, ????????. [Dialogos]

When I go musing all alone,
Thinking of divers things
When I build castles in the air,
Void of sorrow and void of fear,
Pleasing myself with phantasms sweet
Methinks the time runs very fleet.
All my joys to this are folly,
Naught so sweet as melancholy.

When I lie waking all alone,
Recounting what I have ill done,
My thoughts on me then tyrannise,
Fear and sorrow me surprise,
Whether I tarry still or go,
Methinks the time moves very slow.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so sad as melancholy.

When to myself I act and smile,
With pleasing thoughts the time beguile.
By a brook side or wood so green,
Unheard, unsought for, or unseen,
A thousand pleasures do me bless,
And crown my soul with happiness.
All my joys besides are folly,
None so sweet as melancholy.

When I lie, sit, or walk alone,
I sigh, I grieve, making great mone,
In a dark grove, or irksome den,
With discontents and Furies then,
A thousand miseries at once
Mine heavy heart and soul ensonce,
All my griefs to this are jolly,
None so sour as melancholy.

Methinks I hear, methinks I see,
Sweet music, wondrous melody,
Towns, palaces, and cities fine;
Here now, then there; the world is mine,
Rare beauties, gallant ladies shine,
Whate'er is lovely or divine.
All other joys to this are folly,
None so sweet as melancholy.

Methinks I hear, methinks I see
Ghosts, goblins, fiends; my fantasy
Presents a thousand ugly shapes,
Headless bears, black men, and apes,
Doleful outcries, and fearful sights,
My sad and dismal soul affrights.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
None so damn'd as melancholy.

Methinks I court, methinks I kiss,
Methinks I now embrace my mistress
O blessed days, O sweet content,
In Paradise my time is spent.
Such thoughts may still my fancy move,
So may I ever be in love.
All my joys to this are folly,
Naught so sweet as melancholy.

When I recount love's many frights,
My sighs and tears, my waking nights,
My jealous fits; O mine hard fate
I now repent, but 'tis too late.
No torment is so bad as love,
So bitter to my soul can prove.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so harsh as melancholy.

Friends and companions get you gone
'Tis my desire to be alone;
Ne'er well but when my thoughts and I
Do domineer in privacy.
No Gem, no treasure like to this,
'Tis my delight, my crown, my bliss
All my joys to this are folly,
Naught so sweet as melancholy.

'Tis my sole plague to be alone,
I am a beast, a monster grown,
I will no light nor company,
I find it now my misery.
The scene is turn'd, my joys are gone,
Fear, discontent, and sorrows come.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so fierce as melancholy.

I'll not change life with any King,
I ravisht am: can the world bring
More joy, than still to laugh and smile,
In pleasant toys time to beguile?
Do not, O do not trouble me,
So sweet content I feel and see.
All my joys to this are folly,
None so divine as melancholy.

I'll change my state with any wretch,
Thou canst from gaol or dunghill fetch;
My pain past cure, another hell,
I may not in this torment dwell!
Now desperate I hate my life,
Lend me a halter or a knife;
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so damn'd as melancholy.



DEMOCRITUS JUNIOR TO THE READER.


GENTLE Reader, I presume thou wilt be very inquisitive to
know what  antic or personate actor this is, that so
insolently intrudes upon this common theatre, to the world's
view, arrogating another man's name; whence he is, why he
doth it, and what he hath to say; although, as he said,
Primum si noluero, non respondebo, quis coacturus est? I am a
free man born, and may choose whether I will tell; who can
compel me? If I be urged, 'twill as readily reply as that
Egyptian in Plutarch when a curious fellow would needs know
what he had in his basket, Quum vides velatam, quid inquiris
im rem absconditam? It was therefore covered, because he
should not know what was in it. Seek not after that which is
hid; if the contents please thee, "and be for thy use,
suppose the Man in the Moon, or whom thou wilt to be the
Author;" I would not willingly be known. Yet in some sort to
give thee satisfaction, which is more than I need, I will
show a reason, both of this usurped name, title, and subject.
And first of the name of Democritus; lest any man, by reason
of it, should be deceived, expecting a pasquil, a satire,
some ridiculous treatise (as I myself should have done): some
prodigious tenet, or paradox of the earth's motion, of
infinite worlds, in infinito vacuo, ex fortuita atomorum
collisione, in an infinite waste, so caused by an accidental
collision of motes in the sun, all which Democritus held,
Epicurus and their master Lucippus of old maintained, and are
lately revived by Copernicus, Brunus, and some others.
Besides, it hath been always an ordinary custom, as Gellius
observes, "for later writers and impostors, to broach many
absurd and insolent fictions, under the name of so noble a
philosopher as Democritus, to get themselves credit, and by
that means the more to be respected," as artificers usually
do, Novo qui marmori ascribunt Praxitilum suo. 'Tis not so
with me.

Non hic Centauros, non Gorgona, Harpyasquae
Invenies, hominem pagina nostra sapit.
No Centaurs here, or Gorgons look to find,
My subject is of man and human kind.

Thou thyself art the subject of my discourse.

Quicquid agunt homines, votum, timor, ira, volaptas,
Gaudia, discursus, nostri farrago libelli.
Whate'er men do, vows, fears, in ire, in sport,
Joys, wand'rings, are the sum of my report.


My intent is no otherwise to use his name, than Mercurius
Gallobelgicus, Mercurius Britannicus, use the name of
Mercury, Democritus Christianus, &c.; although there be some
other circumstances for which I have masked myself under this
vizard, and some peculiar respect which I cannot so well
express, until I have set down a brief character of this our
Democritus, what he was, with an Epitome of his life.

Democritus, as he is described by Hippocrates and Laertius,
was little wearish old man, very melancholy by nature, averse
from company in his latter days, and much given to
solitariness, a famous philosopher in his age, coaevus with
Socrates, wholly addicted to his studies at the last, and to
a private life wrote many excellent works, a great divine,
according to the divinity of those times, an expert
physician, a politician, an excellent mathematician, as
Diacosmus and the rest of his works do witness, he was much
delighted with the studies of husbandry, saith Columella, and
often I find him cited by Constantinus and others treating of
that subject. He knew the natures, differences of all beasts,
plants, fishes, birds; and, as some say, could understand the
tunes and voices of them. In a word he was omnifariam doctus,
a general scholar, a great student; and to the intent he
might better contemplate, I find it related by some, that he
put out his eyes, and was in his old age voluntarily blind,
yet saw more than all Greece besides, and writ of every
subject, Nihil in toto optificio naturae de quo non scripsit.
A man of an excellent wit, profound conceit; and to attain
knowledge the better in his younger years he travelled to
Egypt and Athens, to confer with learned men, "admired of
some, despised of others." After a wandering life, he settled
at Abdera, a town in Thrace, and was sent for thither to be
their law-maker, Recorder, or town-clerk as some will; or as
others, he was there bred and born. Howsoever it was, there
he lived at last in a garden in the suburbs, wholly betaking
himself to his studies and a private life, "saving that
sometimes he would walk down to the haven, and laugh heartily
at such variety of ridiculous objects, which there he saw."
Such a one was Democritus.

But in the mean time, how doth this concern me, or upon what
reference do I usurp this habit? I confess, indeed, that to
compare myself unto him for aught I have yet said, were both
impudency and arrogancy. I do not presume to make any
parallel, Antistat mihi millibus trecentis, parvus sum,
nullus sum, altum nec spiro, nec spero. Yet thus much I will
say of myself; and that I hope without all suspicion of
pride, or self-conceit, I have lived a silent, sedentary,
solitary, private life, mihi et musis in the University, as
long almost as Xenocrates in Athens, ad senectam fere to
learn wisdom as he did, penned up most part in my study. For
I have been brought up a student in the most flourishing
college of Europe, augustissimo collegio, and can brag with
Jovius, almost, "in ea luce domicilii Vaticani, totius orbis
celeberrimi, per 37 annos multa opportunaque didici;" for
thirty years I have continued (having the use of as good
libraries as ever he had) a scholar, and would be therefore
loth, either by living as a drone, to be an unprofitable or
unworthy member of so learned and noble a society, or to
write that which should be any way dishonourable to such a
royal and ample foundation. Something I have done, though by
my profession a divine, yet turbine raptus ingenii, as he
said, out of a running wit, an unconstant, unsettled mind, I
had a great desire (not able to attain to a superficial skill
in any) to have some smattering in all, to be aliquis in
omnibus, nullus in singulis, which Plato commends, out of him
Lipsius approves and furthers, "as fit to be imprinted in all
curious wits, not to be a slave of one science, or dwell
together in one subject, as most do, but to rove abroad,
centum puer artium, to have an oar in every man's boat, to
taste of every dish, and sip of every cup," which, saith
Montaigne, was well performed by Aristotle, and his learned
countryman Adrian Turnebus. This roving humour (though not
with like success) I have ever had, and like a ranging
spaniel, that barks at every bird he sees, leaving his game,
I have followed all, saving that which I should, and may
justly complain, and truly, qui ubique est, nusquam est, (he
that is everywhere is nowhere) which Gesner did in modesty,
that I have read many books, but to little purpose, for want
of good method; I have confusedly tumbled over divers authors
in our libraries, with small profit for want of art, order,
memory, judgment. I never travelled but in map or card, in
which my unconfined thoughts have freely expatiated, as
having ever been especially delighted with the study of
Cosmography. Saturn was lord of my geniture, culminating,
&c., and Mars principal significator of manners, in partile
conjunction with my ascendant; both fortunate in their
houses, &c. I am not poor, I am not rich; nihil est, nihil
deest, I have little, I want nothing: all my treasure is in
Minerva's tower. Greater preferment as I could never get, so
am I not in debt for it, I have a competence (laus Deo) from
my noble and munificent patrons, though I live still a
collegiate student, as Democritus in his garden, and lead a
monastic life, ipse mihi theatrum, sequestered from those
tumults and troubles of the world, Et tanquam in specula
positus, (as he said) in some high place above you all, like
Stoicus Sapiens, omnia saecula, praeterita presentiaque
videns, uno velut intuitu, I hear and see what is done
abroad, how others run, ride, turmoil, and macerate
themselves in court and country, far from those wrangling
lawsuits, aulae vanitatem, fori ambitionem, ridere mecum
soleo: I laugh at all, only secure lest my suit go amiss, my
ships perish, corn and cattle miscarry, trade decay, I have
no wife nor children good or bad to provide for. A mere
spectator of other men's fortunes and adventures, and how
they act their parts, which methinks are diversely presented
unto me as from a common theatre or scene. I hear new news
every day, and those ordinary rumours of war, plagues, fires,
inundations, thefts, murders, massacres, meteors, comets,
spectrums, prodigies, apparitions, of towns taken, cities
besieged in France, Germany, Turkey, Persia, Poland, &c.,
daily musters and preparations, and such like, which these
tempestuous times afford, battles fought, so many men slain,
monomachies, shipwrecks, piracies, and sea-fights; peace,
leagues, stratagems, and fresh alarms. A vast confusion of
vows, wishes, actions, edicts, petitions, lawsuits, pleas,
laws, proclamations, complaints, grievances, are daily
brought to our ears. New books every day, pamphlets,
currantoes, stories, whole catalogues of volumes of all
sorts, new paradoxes, opinions, schisms, heresies,
controversies in philosophy, religion, &c. Now come tidings
of weddings, maskings, mummeries, entertainments, jubilees,
embassies, tilts and tournaments, trophies, triumphs, revels,
sports, plays: then again, as in a new shifted scene,
treasons, cheating tricks, robberies, enormous villainies in
all kinds, funerals, burials, deaths of princes, new
discoveries, expeditions, now comical, then tragical matters.
To-day we hear of new lords and officers created, to-morrow
of some great men deposed, and then again of fresh honours
conferred; one is let loose, another imprisoned; one
purchaseth, another breaketh: he thrives, his neighbour turns
bankrupt: now plenty, then again dearth and famine; one runs,
another rides, wrangles, laughs, weeps, &c. Thus I daily
hear, and such like, both private and public news, amidst the
gallantry and misery of the world; jollity, pride,
perplexities and cares, simplicity and villainy; subtlety,
knavery, candour and integrity, mutually mixed and offering
themselves; I rub on privus privatus; as I have still lived,
so I now continue, statu quo prius, left to a solitary life,
and mine own domestic discontents: saving that sometimes, ne
quid mentiar, as Diogenes went into the city, and Democritus
to the haven to see fashions, I did for my recreation now and
then walk abroad, look into the world, and could not choose
but make some little observation, non tam sagax observator,
ac simplex recitator, (not so sagacious an observer as simple
a narrator), not as they did, to scoff or laugh at all, but
with a mixed passion.

"Bilem saepe, jocum vestri movere tumultus."
Ye wretched mimics, whose fond heats have been,
How oft! the objects of my mirth and spleen.


I did sometime laugh and scoff with Lucian, and satirically
tax with Menippus, lament with Heraclitus, sometimes again I
was petulanti splene chachinno, (Per. a laugher with a
petulant spleen) and then again, urere bilis jecur, I was
much moved to see that abuse which I could not mend. In which
passion howsoever I may sympathize with him or them, 'tis for
no such respect I shroud myself under his name; but either in
an unknown habit to assume a little more liberty and freedom
of speech, or if you will needs know, for that reason and
only respect which Hippocrates relates at large in his
Epistle to Damegetus, wherein he doth express, how coming to
visit him one day, he found Democritus in his garden at
Abdera, in the suburb; under a shady bower, with a book on
his knees, busy at his study, sometimes writing, sometimes
walking. The subject of his book was melancholy and madness;
about him lay the carcasses of many several beasts, newly by
him cut up and anatomised; not that he did contemn God's
creatures, as he told Hippocrates, but to find out the seat
of this atra bilis, or melancholy, whence it proceeds, and
how it was engendered in men's bodies, to the intent he might
better cure it in himself, and by his writings and
observations teach others how to prevent and avoid it. Which
good intent of his, Hippocrates highly commended: Democritus
Junior is therefore bold to imitate, and because he left it
imperfect, and it is now lost, quasi succenturiator
Democriti, to revive again, prosecute, and finish in this
treatise.

You have had a reason of the name. If the title and
inscription offend your gravity, were it a sufficient
justification to accuse others, I could produce many sober
treatises, even sermons themselves, which in their fronts
carry more fantastical names. Howsoever, it is a kind of
policy in these days, to prefix a fantastical title to a book
which is to be sold; for, as larks come down to a day-net,
many vain readers will tarry and stand gazing like silly
passengers at an antic picture in a painter's shop, that will
not look at a judicious piece. And, indeed, as Scaliger
observes, "nothing more invites a reader than an argument
unlooked for, unthought of, and sells better than a scurrile
pamphlet," tum maxime cum novitas excitat palatum. "Many
men," saith Gellius, "are very conceited in their
inscriptions," "and able (as Pliny quotes out of Seneca) to
make him loiter by the way that went in haste to fetch a
midwife for his daughter, now ready to lie down." For my
part, I have honourable precedents for this which I have
done: I will cite one for all, Anthony Zara, Pap. Episc., his
Anatomy of Wit, in four sections, members, subsections, &c.,
to be read in our libraries.

If any man except against the matter or manner of treating of
this my subject, and will demand a reason of it, I can allege
more than one; I write of melancholy, by being busy to avoid
melancholy. There is no greater cause of melancholy than
idleness, "no better cure than business," as Rhasis holds:
and howbeit, stultus labor est ineptiarum, to be busy in toys
is to small purpose, yet hear that divine Seneca, aliud agere
quam nihil, better do to no end, than nothing. I wrote
therefore. and busied myself in this playing labour, otiosaq.
diligentia ut vitarem torporem feriandi with Vectius in
Macrobius, atq. otium in utile verterem negotium.

Simul et jucunda est idonea dicere vitae,
Lectorem delectando simul atque monendo.
Poets would profit or delight mankind,
And with the pleasing have th' instructive join'd.
Profit and pleasure, then to mix with art,
T'inform the judgment, nor offend the heart,
Shall gain all votes.


To this end I write, like them, saith Lucian, that "recite to
trees, and declaim to pillars for want of auditors:" as
Paulus Aegineta ingenuously confesseth, "not that anything
was unknown or omitted, but to exercise myself," which course
if some took, I think it would be good for their bodies, and
much better for their souls; or peradventure as others do,
for fame; to show myself (Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire
hoc sciat alter). I might be of Thucydides' opinion, "to know
a thing and not to express it, is all one as if he knew it
not." When I first took this task in hand, et quod ait ille,
impellente genio negotium suscepi, this I aimed at; vel ut
lenirem animum scribendo, to ease my mind by writing; for I
had gravidum cor, foetum caput, a kind of imposthume in my
head, which I was very desirous to be unladen of, and could
imagine no fitter evacuation than this. Besides, I might not
well refrain, for ubi dolor, ibi digitus, one must needs
scratch where it itches. I was not a little offended with
this malady, shall I say my Mistress "melancholy," my
Aegeria, or my malus genius? and for that cause, as he that
is stung with a scorpion, I would expel clavum clavo, comfort
one sorrow with another, idleness with idleness, ut ex vipera
Theriacum, make an antidote out of that which was the prime
cause of my disease. Or as he did, of whom Felix Plater
speaks, that thought he had some of Aristophanes' frogs in
his belly, still crying Brecc ckex, coax, coax, oop, oop, and
for that cause studied physic seven years, and travelled over
most part of Europe to ease himself. To do myself good I
turned over such physicians as our libraries would afford, or
my private friends impart, and have taken this pains. And why
not? Carden professeth he wrote his book, "De Consolatione"
after his son's death, to comfort himself; so did Tully write
of the same subject with like intent after his daughter's
departure, if it be his at least, or some impostor's put out
in his name, which Lipsius probably suspects. Concerning
myself, I can peradventure affirm with Marius in Sallust,
"that which others hear or read of, I felt and practised
myself; they get their knowledge by books, I mine by
melancholising." Experto crede Roberto. Something I can speak
out of experience, aerumnabilis experientia me docuit; and
with her in the poet, Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere
disco(ido. Virg. "Taught by that Power that pities me, I
learn to pity them"); I would help others out of a fellow-
feeling; and, as that virtuous lady did of old, "being a
leper herself, bestow all her portion to build an hospital
for lepers," I will spend my time and knowledge, which are my
greatest fortunes, for the common good of all.

Yea, but you will infer that this is actum agere, an
unnecessary work, cramben bis coctam apponere [to serve up
reheated cabbage], the same again and again in other words.
To what purpose? "Nothing is omitted that may well be said,"
so thought Lucian in the like theme. How many excellent
physicians have written just volumes and elaborate tracts of
this subject? No news here; that which I have is stolen from
others, Dicitque mihi mea pagina, fur es. If that severe doom
of Synesius be true, "it is a greater offence to steal dead
men's labours, than their clothes," what shall become of most
writers? I hold up my hand at the bar among other; and am
guilty of felony in this kind, habes confitentem reum, I am
content to be pressed with the rest. 'Tis most true, tenet
insanabile multos scribendi cacoethes, and "there is no end
of writing of books," as the Wise-man found of old, in this
scribbling age, especially wherein "the number of books is
without number, (as a worthy man saith) presses be
oppressed," and out of an itching humour that every man hath
to show himself desirous of fame and honour (scribimus
indocti doctique --), he will write no matter what, and
scrape together it boots not whence. "Bewitched with this
desire of fame, etiam mediis in morbis, to the disparagement
of their health, and scarce able to hold a pen, they must say
something, "and get themselves a name," saith Scaliger,
"though it be to the downfall and ruin of many others." To be
counted writers, scriptores ut salutentur, to be thought and
held Polumathes and Polyhistors, apud imperitum vulgus ob
ventosae nomem artis, to get a paper-kingdom: nulla spe
quaestus sed ampla famae, in this precipitate, ambitious age,
nunc ut est saeculum, inter immaturam eruditionem, ambitiosum
et praeceps ('tis Scaliger's censure); and they that are
scarce auditors, vix auditores, must be masters and teachers,
before they be capable and fit hearers. They will rush into
all learning, togatam armatam, divine, human authors, rake
over all indexes and pamphlets for notes, as our merchants do 
strange havens for traffic, write great tomes, Cum non sint
re vera doctiores, sed loquaciores, whereas they are not
thereby better scholars, but greater praters. They commonly
pretend public good, but as a Gesner observes, 'tis pride and
vanity that eggs them on; no news or aught worthy of note,
but the same in other terms. Ne feriarentur fortasse
typographi, vel ideo scribendum est aliquid ut se vixisse
testentur. As apothecaries we make new mixtures every day,
pour out of one vessel into another; and as those old Romans
robbed all the cities of the world, to set out their bad-
sited Rome, we skim off the cream of other men's wits, pick
the choice flowers of their tilled gardens to set out our own
sterile plots. Castrant alios ut libros suos per se graciles
alieno adipe suffarciant (so Jovius inveighs). They lard
their lean books with the fat of others' works. Ineruditi
fures, &c. A fault that every writer finds, as I do now, and
yet faulty themselves, Trium literarum homines, all thieves;
they pilfer out of old writers to stuff up their new
comments, scrape Ennius dung-hills, and out of Democritus'
pit, as I have done. By which means it comes to pass, "that
not only libraries and shops are full of our putid papers,
but every close-stool and jakes, Scribunt carmina quae legunt
cacantes [they write poems which are read while shitting];
they serve to put under pies, to lap spice in, and keep
roast-meat from burning. "With us in France," saith Scaliger,
"every man hath liberty to write, but few ability. Heretofore
learning was graced by judicious scholars, but now noble
sciences are vilified by base and illiterate scribblers,"
that either write for vain-glory, need, to get money, or as
parasites to flatter and collogue with some great men, they
put out burras, quisquiliasque ineptiasque. Amongst so many
thousand authors you shall scarce find one, by reading of
whom you shall be any whit better, but rather much worse,
quibus inficitur potius quam perficitur, by which he is
rather infected than any way perfected.

                 ------ Qui taila legit,
Quid didicit tandem, quid scit nisi somnia, nugas?
(What does anyone, who reads such works, learn or know but
dreams and trifling things?)

So that oftentimes it falls out (which Callimachus taxed of
old) a great book is a great mischief. Cardan finds fault
with Frenchmen and Germans, for their scribbling to no
purpose, non inquit ab edendo deterreo, modo novum aliquid
inveniant, he doth not bar them to write, so that it be some
new invention of their own; but we weave the same web still,
twist the same rope again and again; or if it be a new
invention, 'tis but some bauble or toy which idle fellows
write, for as idle fellows to read, and who so cannot invent?
"He must have a barren wit, that in this scribbling age can
forge nothing. Princes show their armies, rich men vaunt
their buildings, soldiers their manhood, and scholars vent
their toys;" they must read, they must hear whether they will
or no.
Et quodcumque semel chartis illeverit, omnes
Gestiet a furno redeuntes scire lacuqae,
Et pueros et anus --.
What once is said and writ, all men must know,
Old wives and children as they come and go.

"What a company of poets hath this year brought out," as
Pliny complains to Sossius Sinesius. "This April every day
some or other have recited." What a catalogue of new books
all this year, all this age (I say), have our Frankfort
Marts, our domestic Marts brought out? Twice a year,
"Proferunt se nova ingena et ostentant," we stretch our wits
out, and set them to sale, magno conatu nihil agimus. So that
which Gesner much desires, if a speedy reformation be not
had, by some Prince's Edicts and grave Supervisors, to
restrain this liberty, it will run on ad infinitum. Quis tam
avidus librorum helluo, who can read them? As already, we
shall have a vast Chaos and confusion of books, we are
oppressed with them, dour eyes ache with reading, our fingers
with turning. For my part I am one of the number nos numerus
sumus, (we are mere ciphers): I do not deny it, I have only
this of Macrobius to say for myself, Omne meum, nihil meum,
'tis all mine, and none mine. As a good housewife out of
divers fleeces weaves one piece of cloth, a bee gathers wax
and honey out of many flowers, and makes a new bundle of all,
Floriferis ut apes in saltibus omnia libant, I have
laboriously collected this Cento out of divers writers, and
that sine injuria, I have wronged no authors, but given every
man his own; which Hierom so much commends in Nepotian; he
stole not whole verses, pages, tracts, as some do now-a-days,
concealing their author's names, but still said this was
Cyprian's, that Lactantius, that Hillarius, so said Minutius
Felix, so Victorinus, thus far Arnobius: I cite and quote
mine authors (which, howsoever some illiterate scribblers
account pedantical, as a cloak of ignorance, and opposite to
their affected fine style, I must and wilt use) sumpsi, non
surripui; and what Varro, lib. 6. de re rust. speaks of bees,
minime maleficiae nullius opus vellicantes faciunt deterius,
I can say of myself, Whom have I injured? The matter is
theirs most part, and yet mine, apparet unde sumptum sit
(which Seneca approves), aliud tamen quam unde sumptum sit
apparet, which nature doth with the aliment of our bodies
incorporate, digest, assimilate, I do concoquere quod hausi,
dispose of what I take. I make them pay tribute, to set out
this my Maceronicon, the method only is mine own, I must
usurp that of Wecker e Ter. nihil dictum quod non dictum
prius, methodus sola artificem ostendit, we can say nothing
but what hath been said, the composition and method is ours
only, and shows a scholar. Oribasius, Aesius, Avicenna, have
all out of Galen, but to their own method, diverso stilo, non
diversa fide. Our poets steal from Homer; he spews, saith
Aelian, they lick it up. Divines use Austin's words verbatim
still, and our story-dressers, do as much; he that comes last
is commonly best.
 -- donec quid grandius aetas
Postera sorsque ferat melior. --
(-- until a later age and a happier lot produce something
more truly grand --)


Though there were many giants of old in Physic and
Philosophy, yet I say with Didacus Stella, "A dwarf standing
on the shoulders of a giant may see farther than a giant
himself;" I may likely add, alter, and see farther than my
predecessors; and it is no greater prejudice for me to indite
after others, than for Aelianus Montaltus, that famous
physician, to write de morbis capitis after Jason Pratensis,
Heurnius, Hildesheim, &c., many horses to run in a race, one
logician, one rhetorician, after another. Oppose then what
thou wilt,
Allatres licet usque nos et usque,
Et Gannitibus improbis lacessas.
[You may rail at everything of ours
and snarling scourge our inferior stuff]

I solve it thus. And for those other faults of barbarism,
Doric dialect, extemporanean style, tautologies, apish
imitation, a rhapsody of rags gathered together from several
dung-hills, excrements of authors, toys and fopperies
confusedly tumbled out, without art, invention, judgment,
wit, learning, harsh, raw, rude, fantastical, absurd,
insolent, indiscreet, ill-composed, indigested, vain,
scurrile, idle, dull, and dry; I confess all ('tis partly
affected), thou canst not think worse of me than I do of
myself. 'Tis not worth the reading, I yield it, I desire thee
not to lose time in perusing so vain a subject, I should be
peradventure loth myself to read him or thee so writing; 'tis
not operae pretium. All I say is this, that I have precedents
for it, which Isocrates calls, perfugium iis qui peccant,
others as absurd, vain, idle, illiterate, &c. Nonnulli alii
idem fecerunt; others have done as much, it may be more, and
perhaps thou thyself; Novimus et qui te, &c. We have all our
faults; scimus, et hanc veniam, &c.; thou censurest me, so
have I done others, and may do thee, Cedimus inque vicem &c.,
'tis lex talionis, quid pro quo. Go now, censure, criticise,
scoff, and rail.

Nasuus sis usquelicet, sis denique nasus:
Non potes in nugas dicere plura meas,
Ipse ego quam dixi, &c.
Wert thou all scoffs and flouts, a very Momus,
Than we ourselves, thou canst not say worse of us.


Thus, as when women scold, have I cried whore first, and in
some men's censures I am afraid I have overshot myself;
Laudare se vani, vituperare stulti, as I do not arrogate, I
will not derogate. Primus vestrum non sum, nec imus, I am
none of the best, I am none of the meanest of you. As I am an
inch, or so many feet, so many parasangs, after him or him, I
may be peradventure an ace before thee. Be it therefore as it
is, well or ill, I have essayed, put myself upon the stage; I
must abide the censure, I may not escape it. It is most true,
stylus virum arguit, our style bewrays us, and as hunters
find their game by the trace, so is a man's genius descried
by his works, Multa melius ex sermone quam lineamentis, de
moribus hominum judicamus; it was old Cato's rule. I have
laid myself open (I know it) in this treatise, turned mine
inside outward: I shall be censured, I doubt not; for, to say
truth with Erasmus, nihil morosius hominum judiciis, there is
naught so peevish as men's judgments; yet this is some
comfort, ut palata, sic judicia, our censures are as various
as our palates.

Tres mihi convivae prope dissentere videntur,
Poscentes vario multum diversa palato, &c.
Three guests I have, dissenting at my feast,
Requiring each to gratify his taste
With different food.


Our writings are as so many dishes, our readers guests, our
books like beauty, that which one admires another rejects; so
are we approved as men's fancies are inclined. Pro captu
lectoris habent sua fata libelli. That which is most pleasing
to one is amaracum sui, most harsh to another. Quot homines,
tot sententiae, so many men, so many minds: that which thou
condemnest he commends. Quod petis, id sane est invisum
acidumque duobus. He respects matter, thou art wholly for
words; he loves a loose and free style, thou art all for neat
composition, strong lines, hyperboles, allegories; he desires
a fine frontispiece, enticing pictures, such as Hieron.
Natali the jesuit hath cut to the Dominicals, to draw on the
reader's attention, which thou rejectest; that which one
admires, another explodes as most absurd and ridiculous. If
it be not pointblank to his humour, his method, his conceit,
si quid forsan omissum, quod is animo conceperit, si quae
dicito, &c. If aught be omitted, or added, which he likes, or
dislikes, thou art mancipium paucae lectionis, an idiot, an
ass, nullus es, or plagiarius, a trifler, a trivant, thou art
an idle fellow; or else it is a thing of mere industry, a
collection without wit or invention, a very toy. Facilia sic
putant omnes quae jam facta, nec de salebris cogitant ubi via
strata; so men are valued, their labours vilified by fellows
of no worth themselves, as things of nought, who could not
have done so much. Unusquisque abundat sensa suo, every man
abounds in his own sense; and whilst each particular party is
so affected, how should one please all?
Quid dem? quid non dem? Renuis tu quod jubet ille.
 -- What courses must I chase?
What not? What both would order you refuse.


How shall I hope to express myself to each man's humour and
conceit, or to give satisfaction to all? Some understand too
little, some too much, qui similiter in legendos libros,
atque in salutandos homimes irruunt, non cogitantes quales,
sed quibus vestibus induti sint,[who read books in the same
way as they salute men, not thinking of their qualities, but
of the clothes they are dressed in] as Austin observes, not
regarding what, but who write, orexin habet auctoris
celebritas [he has an appetite  for famous authors], not
valuing the metal, but stamp that is upon it, Cantharum
aspiciunt, non quid in eo [He looks at the goblet, not at
what is in it]. If he be not rich, in great place, polite and
brave, a great doctor, or full fraught with grand titles,
though never so well qualified, he is a dunce; but, as
Baronius hath it of Cardinal Caraffa's works, he is a mere
hog that rejects any man for his poverty. Some are too
partial, as friends to overween, others come with a prejudice
to carp, vilify, detract, and scoff; (qui de me forsan,
quicquid est, omni contemptu contemptius judicant) some as
bees for honey, some as spiders to gather poison. What shall
I do in this case? As a Dutch host, if you come to an inn in
Germany, and dislike your fare, diet, lodging, &c., replies
in a surly tone, "aliud tibi quaeras diversorium," if you
like not this, get you to another inn: I resolve, if you like
not my writing, go read something else. I do not much esteem
thy censure, take thy course, it is not as thou wilt, nor as
will, but when we have both done, that of Plinius Secundus to
Trajan will prove true, "Every man's witty labour takes not,
except the matter, subject, occasion, and some commending
favourite happen to it.' If I be taxed, exploded by thee and
some such, I shall haply be approved and commended by others, 
and so have been (Expertus loquor), and may truly say with
Jovius in like case, (absit verbo jactantia) heroum
quorundam, pontificum, et virorum nobilium familiaritatem a
amicitiam, gratasque gratias, et multorum bene laudatorum
laudes sum in promeritus, as I have been honoured by some
worthy men, so have I been vilified by others, and shall be.
At the first publishing of this book, (which Probus of
Persius' satires), editum librum continuo mirari homines,
atque avide deripere coeperunt, I may in some sort apply to
this my work. The first, second, and third editions were
suddenly gone, eagerly read, and, as I have said, not much
approved by some, as scornfully rejected by others. But it
was Democritus his fortune, Idem admirationi et irrisioni
habitus. 'Twas Seneca's fate, that superintenent of wit,
learning, judgment, ad stuporem doctus [of astonishing
learning], the best of Greek and Latin writers, in Plutarch's
opinion; "that renowned corrector of vice," as Fabius terms
him, "and painful omniscious philosopher, that writ so
excellently and admirably well," could not please all
parties, or escape censure. How is he vilified by Caligula,
Agellius, Fabius, and Lipsius himself, his chief propugner?
In eo pleraque pernitiosa, saith the same Fabius, many
childish tracts and sentences he hath, sermo illaboratus, too
negligent often and remiss, as Agellius observes, oratio
vulgaris et protrita, dicaces a ineptae senentiae, erudito
plebeia, an homely shallow writer as he is. In partibus
spinas et fastidia habet, saith Lipsius; and, as in all his
other works, so especially in his epistles, aliae in argutiis
et ineptiis occupantur, intricatus alicubi, et parum
compositus, sine copia rerum hoc fecit, he ambles up many
things together immethodically, after the Stoics' fashion,
parum ordinavit, multa accumulavit, &c.  If Seneca be thus
lashed, and many famous men that I could name, what shall I
expect? How shall I that am vix umbra tanti philosophi, hope
to please? "No man so absolute (Erasmus holds) to satisfy
all, except antiquity, prescription, &c., set a bar." But as
I have proved in Seneca, this will not always take place, how
shall I evade? 'Tis the common doom of all writers, I must (I
say) abide it; I seek not applause; Non ego ventosae venor
suffragia plebis; again, non sum adeo informis, I would not
be vilified.
 -- laudatus abunde.
Non fastiditus si tibi, lector, ero.
I fear good men's censures, and to their favourable
acceptance I submit my labours,
-- et linguas mancipiorum
Contemno.
[and I despise the tongues of huxters]


As the barking of a dog, I securely contemn those malicious
and scurrile obloquies, flouts, calumnies of railers and
detractors; I scorn the rest. What therefore I have said, pro
tenuitate mea, I have said.

One or two things yet I was desirous to have amended if I
could, concerning the manner of handling this my subject, for
which I must apologise, deprecari, and upon better advice
give the friendly reader notice: it was not mine intent to
prostitute my muse in English, or to divulge secreta
Minervae, but to have exposed this more contract in Latin, if
I could have got it printed. Any scurrile pamphlet is welcome
to oar mercenary stationers in English; they print all,

-- euduntque libellos
In quorum foliis vix simia nuda cacaret;

But in Latin they will not deal; which is one of the reasons
Nicholas Car, in his oration of the paucity of English
writers, gives, that so many flourishing wits are smothered
in oblivion, lie dead and buried in this our nation. Another
main fault is, that I have not revised the copy, and amended
the style, which now flows remissly, as it was first
conceived; but my leisure would not permit; Feci nec quod
potui, nec quod volui, I confess it is neither as I would,
nor as it should be.

Cum relego scripsisse pudet, quia plurima cerno
Me quoque quae fuerant judice digna lini.
When I peruse this tract which I have writ,
I am abash'd, and much I hold unfit.

Et quod gravissimum [and what is worse], in the matter
itself, many things I disallow at this present, which when I
writ, non eadem est aetas, non mens; I would willingly
retract much, &c., but 'tis too late, I can only crave pardon
now for what is amiss.

I might indeed, (had I wisely done) observed that precept of
the poet, -- nonumque prematur in annum, and have taken more
care: or, as Alexander the physician would have done by lapis
lazuli, fifty times washed before it be used, I should have
revised, corrected and amended this tract; but I had not (as
I said) that happy leisure, no amanuenses or assistants.
Pancrates in  wanting a servant as he went from Memphis to
Coptus in Egypt, took a door bar, and after some
superstitious words pronounced (Eucrates the relator was then
present) made it stand up like a serving-man, fetch him
water, turn the spit, serve in supper, and what work he would
besides; and when he had done that service he desired, turned
his man to a stick again. I have no such skill to make new
men at my pleasure, or means to hire them; no whistle to call
like the master of a ship, and bid them run, &c. I have no
such authority, no such benefactors, as that noble Ambrosius
was to Origen, allowing him six or seven amanuenses to write
out his dictates; I must for that cause do my business myself
and was therefore enforced, as a bear doth her whelps, to
bring forth this confused lump; I had not time to lick it
into form, as she doth her young ones, but even so to publish
it, as it was first written quicquid in buccam venit,[as it
came into the mouth] in an extemporean style, as I do
commonly all other exercises, effudi quicqaid dictavit genius
meus, out of a confused company of notes, and writ with as
small deliberation as I do ordinarily speak, without all
affectation of big words, fustian phrases, jingling terms,
tropes, strong lines, that like Acesta's arrows caught fire
as they flew, strains of wit, brave heats, elogies,
hyperbolical exornations, elegancies, &c., which many so much
affect. I am auquae potor,[a water drinker] drink no wine at
all, which so much improves our modern wits, a loose, plain,
rude writer, ficum voco ficum, et ligonem ligonem, and as
free, as loose, idem calamo quod in mente, I call a spade a
spade, animis haec scribo, non auribus, I respect matter not
words; remembering that of Cardan, verba propter res, non res
propter verba [the word is for the thing, not the thing for
the word]: and seeking with Seneca, quid scribam, non
quemadmodum, rather what than how to write: for as Philo
thinks, "He that is conversant about matter, neglects words,
and those that excel in this art of speaking, have no
profound learning,

Verba nitent phaleris, at nullas verba medullas
Intus habent --
(Words may be resplendent with ornament, but they contain no
marrow within)

Besides, it was the observation of that wise Seneca, "when
you see a fellow careful about his worth, and neat in his
speech, know this for a certainty that man's mind is busied
about toys, there's no solidity in him." Non est ornamentum
virile concinnitas: [elegance is not a manly distinction] as
he said of a nightingale, vox es, praeterea nihil, &c.[you
are a voice, and nothing beyond that], I am therefore in this
point a professed disciple of Apollonius, a scholar of
Socrates, I neglect phrases, and labour wholly to inform my
reader's understanding, not to please his ear; 'tis not my
study or intent to compose neatly, which an orator requires,
but to express myself readily and plainly as it happens. So
that as a river runs sometimes precipitate and swift, then
dull and slow; now direct, then per ambages;[windingly] now
deep, then shallow; now muddy, then clear; now broad, then
narrow; doth my style flow: now serious, then light; now
comical, then satirical; now more elaborate, then remiss, as
the present subject required, or as at that time I was
affected. And if thou vouchsafe to read this treatise, it
shall seem no otherwise to thee, than the way to an ordinary
traveller, sometimes fair, sometimes foul; here champaign,
there inclosed; barren in one place, better soil in another:
by woods, groves, hills, dales, plains, &c. I shall lead thee
per ardua montium, et lubrica vallium, et roscida cespitum,
et glebosa camporum, [through high mountains, and smooth
valleys, and dewy pastures, and earthy fields] and through
variety of objects that which thou shalt like and surely
dislike.

For the matter itself or method, if it be faulty, consider I
pray you that of Columella, Nihil perfectum, aut a singulari
consummatum industria, no man can observe all, much is
defective no doubt, may be justly taxed, altered, and avoided
in Galen, Aristotle, those great masters. Boni venatoris (one
holds) plures feras capere, non omnes; he is a good huntsman,
can catch some, not all; I have done my endeavour. Besides, I
dwelt not in this study, Non hic sulcos ducimus, non hoc
pulvere desudamus, I am but a smatterer, I confess, a
stranger, here and there I pull a flower; I do easily grant,
if a rigid censurer should criticise on this which I have
writ, he should not find three sole faults, as Scaliger in
Terence, but three hundred. So many as he hath done in
Cardan's subtleties, as many notable errors as Gul.
Laurembergius, a late professor of Rostocke, discovers in
that anatomy of Laurentius, or Barocius the Venetian in Sacro
boscus [the sacred grove]. And although this be a sixth
edition, in which I should have been more accurate, corrected
all those former escapes, yet it was magni laboris opus, so
difficult and tedious, that as carpenters do find out of
experience, 'tis much better build anew sometime; than repair
an old house; I could as soon write as much more, as alter
that which is written. If aught therefore be amiss (as I
grant there is), I require a friendly admonition, no bitter
invective, Sint musis socii Charites, Furia omnis abesto [let
Charity be the ally of the muses, and all the Furies go far
away],  otherwise, as in ordinary controversies, furem
contentionis nectamus, sed cui bono? We may contend, and
likely misuse each other, but to what purpose? We are both
scholars, say,

-- Arcades ambo,
Et cantare pares, et respondere parati
Both young Arcadians, both alike inspir'd
To sing and answer as the song requir'd.


If we do wrangle, what shall we get by it? Trouble and wrong
ourselves, make sport to others. If I be convict of an error,
I will yield, I will amend. Si quid bonis moribus, si quid
veritati dissentaneum, in sacris vel humanis literis a me
dictum sit, id nec dictum esto. In the mean time I require a
favourable censure of all faults omitted, harsh compositions,
pleonasms of word; tautological repetitions (though Seneca
bear me out, numquam nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis
dicitur) perturbations of tenses, numbers, printers' faults,
&c. My translations are sometimes rather paraphrases than
interpretations, non ad verbum, but as an author, I use more
liberty, and that's only taken which was to my purpose.
Quotations are often inserted in the text, which makes the
style more harsh, or in the margin as it happened. Greek
authors, Plato, Plutarch, Athenaeus, &c., I have cited out of
their interpreters, because the original was not so ready. I
have mingled sacra prophanis but I hope not prophaned, and in
repetition of authors' names, ranked them per accidens, not
according to chronology; sometimes Neotericks before
Ancients, as my memory suggested. Some things are here
altered, expunged in this sixth edition, others amended, much
added, because many good authors in all kinds are come to my
hands since, and 'tis no prejudice, no such indecorum, or
oversight.

Nunqnam ita quicquam bene subducta ratione ad vitam fuit,
Quin res, aetas, usus, semper aliquid apponent novi
Aliquid moneant, ut illa quae scire te credas, nescias,
Et quae tibi putaris prima, in exercendo ut repudias.
Ne'er was aught yet at first contrived so fit,
But use, age, or something would alter it;
Advise thee better, and, upon peruse,
Make thee not say, and what thou takest refuse.


But I am now resolved never to put this treatise out again,
Ne quid nimis, I will not hereafter add, alter, or retract; I
have done. The last and greatest exception is, that I, being
a divine, have meddled with physic,

 -- Tantumne est ab re tua otii tibi,
Aliena ut cures, eaque nihil qua ad te attinent?


Which Menedemus objected to Chremes; have I so much leisure,
or little business of mine own, as to look after other men's
matters which concern me not? What have I to do with physic?
Quod medicorum est promittant medici. The Lacedemonians were
once in counsel about state matters, a debauched fellow spake
excellent well, and to the purpose, his speech was generally
approved: a grave senator steps up, and by all means would
have it repealed, though good, because dehonestabatur pessimo
auctore, it had no better an author; let some good man relate
the same, and then it should pass. This counsel was embraced,
factum est, and it was registered forthwith. Et sic bona
sententia mansit, malus auctor mutatus est. Thou sayest as
much of me, stomachosus as thou art, and grantest,
peradventure, this which I have written in physic, not to be
amiss, had another done it, a professed physician, or so; but
why should I meddle with this tract? Hear me speak. There be
many other subjects, I do easily grant, both in humanity and
divinity, fit to be treated of, of which had I written ad
ostentationem only, to show myself I should have rather
chosen, and in which I have been more conversant, I could
have more willingly luxuriated, and better satisfied myself
and others; but that at this time I was fatally driven upon
this rock of melancholy, and carried away by this by-stream,
which, as a rillet, is deducted from the main channel of my
studies, in which I have pleased and busied myself at idle
hours, as a subject most necessary and commodious. Not that I
prefer it before divinity, which I do acknowledge to be the
queen of professions, and to which all the rest are as
handmaids, but that in divinity I saw no such great need. For
had I written positively, there be so many books in that
kind, so many commentators, treatises, pamphlets,
expositions, sermons, that whole teams of oxen cannot draw
them; and had I been as forward and ambitions as some others,
I might have haply printed a sermon at Paul's Cross, a sermon
in St. Marie's Oxon, a sermon in Christ-Church, or a sermon
before the right honourable, right reverend, a sermon before
the right worshipful, a sermon in Latin, in English, a sermon
with a name, a sermon without, a sermon, a sermon, &c. But I
have been ever as desirous to suppress my labours in this
kind, as others have been to press and publish theirs. To
have written in controversy had been to cut off an hydra's
head, lis litem generat, one begets another, so many
duplications, triplications, and swarms of questions. In
sacro bello hoc quod stili mucrone agitur, that having once
begun, I should never make an end. One had much better, as
Alexander, the sixth pope, long since observed, provoke a
great prince than a begging friar, a Jesuit, or a seminary
priest, I will add, for inexpugnabile genus hoc hominum, they
are an irrefragable society, they must and will have the last
word; and that with such eagerness, impudence, abominable
lying, falsifying, and bitterness in their questions they
proceed, that as he said, furorne caecus, an rapit vis
acrior, an culpa, responsum date? Blind fury, or error, or
rashness, or what it is that eggs them, I know not, I am sure
many times, which Austin perceived long since, tempestate
contentionis serenitas charitatis obnubilatur, with this
tempest of contention, the serenity of charity is
overclouded, and there be too many spirits conjured up
already in this kind in all sciences, and more than we can
tell how to lay, which do so furiously rage, and keep such a
racket, that as Fabius said, "It had been much better for
some of then to have been born dumb, and altogether
illiterate, than so far to dote to their own destruction."

At melius fuerat non scribere, namque tacere
Tutum semper erit,--


'Tis a general fault, so Severinus the Dane complains in
physic, "unhappy men as we are, we spend our days in
unprofitable questions and disputations," intricate
subtleties, de lana caprina[about goats' wool], about
moonshine in the water, "leaving in the meantime those
chiefest treasures of nature untouched, wherein the best
medicines for all manner of diseases are to be found, and do
not only neglect them ourselves, but hinder, condemn; forbid,
and scoff at other; that are willing to inquire after them."
These motives at this present have induced me to make choice
of this medicinal subject.

If any physician in the mean time shall infer, Ne sutor ultra
crepidam, and find himself grieved that I have intruded into
his profession, I will tell him in brief, I do not otherwise
by them, than they do by us. If it be for their advantage, I
know many of their sect which have taken orders, in hope of a
benefice, 'tis a common transition, and why may not a
melancholy divine, that can get nothing but by simony,
profess physic? Drusianus an Italian (Crusianus, but
corruptly, Trithemius calls him) "because he was not
fortunate in his practice, forsook his profession, and writ
afterwards in divinity." Marcilius Ficinus was semel et
simul; a priest and a physician at once, and T. Linacer in
his old age took orders. The Jesuits profess both at this
time, divers of them permissu superiorum, chirurgeons,
panders, bawds, and midwives, &c. Many poor country-vicars,
for want of other means, are driven to their shifts; to turn
mountebank; quacksalvers, empirics, and if our greedy patrons
hold us to such hard conditions, as commonly they do, they
will make most of us work at some trade, as Paul did, at last
turn taskers, maltsters, costermongers, graziers, sell ale as
some have done, or worse. Howsoever in undertaking this task,
I hope I shall commit no great error or indecorum, if all be
considered aright, I can vindicate myself with Georgius,
Braunus, and Hieronymus Hemingius, those two learned divines;
who (to borrow a line or two of mine elder brother) drawn by
a "natural love, the one of pictures and maps, prospectives
and corographical delights, writ that ample theatre of
cities; the other to the study of genealogies, penned
theatrum genealogicum." Or else I can excuse my studies with
Lessius the Jesuit in like case. It is a disease of the soul
on which I am to treat, and as much appertaining to a divine
as to a physician, and who knows not what an agreement there
is betwixt these two professions? A good divine either is or
ought to be a good physician, a spiritual physician at least,
as our Saviour calls himself and was indeed, Mat, iv. 23;
Luke, v. 18; Luke, vii. 8. They differ but in object, the one
of the body, the other of the soul, and use divers medicines
to cure: one amends animam per corpus, the other corpus per
animam, as our Regius Professor of physic well informed us in
a learned lecture of his not long since. One helps the vices
and passions of the soul, anger, lust, desperation, pride,
presumption, &c., by applying that spiritual physic; as the
other uses proper remedies in bodily diseases. Now this being
a common infirmity of body and soul, and such a one that hath
as much need of spiritual as a corporal cure, I could not
find a fitter task to busy myself about, a more apposite
theme, so necessary, so commodious, and generally concerning
all sorts of men, that should so equally participate of both,
and require a whole physician. A divine in this compound
mixed malady can do little alone, a physician in some kinds
of melancholy much less, both make an absolute cure.

 Alterius sic altera poscit opem
-- when in friendship join'd
A mutual succour in each other find.


And 'tis proper to them both, and I hope not unbeseeming me,
who am by my profession a divine, and by mine inclination a
physician. I had Jupiter in my sixth house; I say with
Beroaldus, non sum medicus, nec medicine prorsus expers, in
the theory of physic I have taken some pains, not with an
intent to practice, but to satisfy myself, which was a cause
likewise of the first undertaking of this subject.

If these reasons do not satisfy thee, good reader, as
Alexander Munificus that bountiful prelate, sometimes bishop
of Lincoln, when he had built six castles, ad invidiam operis
eluendam, saith Mr. Cambden, to take away the envy of his
work (which very words Nubrigensis hath of Roger the rich
bishop of Salisbury, who in king Stephen's time built
Shirburn castle, and that of Devizes), to divert the scandal
or imputation, which might be thence inferred, built so many
religious houses. If this my discourse be overmedicinal, or
savour too much of humanity, I promise thee that I will here
after make thee amends in some treatise of divinity. But this
I hope shall suffice, when you have more fully considered of
the matter of this my subject, rem substratam, melancholy,
madness, and of the reasons following, which were my chief
motives: the generality of the disease, the necessity of the
cure, and the commodity or common good that will arise to all
men by the knowledge of it, as shall at large appear in the
ensuing preface. And I doubt not but that in the end you will
say with me, that to anatomise this humour aright, through
all the members of this our Microcosmus, is as great a task,
as to reconcile those chronological errors in the Assyrian
monarchy, find out the quadrature of a circle, the creeks and
sounds of the north-east, or north-west passages, and all but
as good a discovery as that hungry Spaniard's of Terra
Australis Incognita, as great trouble as to perfect the
motion of Mars and Mercury, which so crucifies our
astronomers, or to rectify the Gregorian Kalender. I am so
affected for my part, and hope as Theophrastus did by his
characters, "That our posterity, O friend Policles, shall be
the better for this which we have written, by correcting and
rectifying what is amiss in themselves by our example; and
applying our precepts and cautions to their own use." And as
that great captain Zisca would have a drum made of his skin
when he was dead, because he thought the very noise of it
would put his enemies to flight, I doubt not but that these
following lines, when they shall be recited, or hereafter
read, will drive away melancholy, (though I be gone) as much
as Zisca's drum could terrify his foes. Yet one caution let
me give by the way to my present, or my future reader, who is
actually melancholy, that he read not the symptoms or
prognostics in this following tract, lest by applying that
which he reads to himself, aggravating, appropriating things
generally spoken, to his own person (as melancholy men for
the most part do), he trouble or hurt himself and get in
conclusion more harm than good. I advise them therefore
warily to peruse that tract, Lapides loquitur (so said
Agrippa de occ. Phil.) et caveant lectores ne cerebrum iis
excutiat. The rest I doubt not they may securely read, and to
their benefit. But I am overtedious, I proceed.

Of the necessity and generality of this which I have said, if
any man doubt, I shall desire him to make a brief survey of
the world, as Cyprian adviseth Donat, "supposing himself to
be transported to the top of some high mountain, and thence
to behold the tumults and chances of this wavering world, he
cannot chuse but either laugh at, or pity it." S. Hierom out
of a strong imagination, being in the wilderness, conceived
with himself that he then saw them dancing in Rome; and if
thou shalt either conceive, or climb to see, thou shalt soon
perceive that all the world is mad, that it is melancholy,
dotes; that it is (which Epichthonius Cosmopolites expressed
not many years since in a map) made like a fool's head (with
that motto, Caput helleboro dignum) a crazed head, cavea
stultorum, a fool's paradise, or as Apollonius, a common
prison of gulls, cheaters, flatterers, &c., and needs to be
reformed. Strabo in the ninth book of his geography, compares
Greece to the picture of a man, which comparison of his, Nic.
Gerbelius in his exposition of Sophianus' map, approves; the
breast lies open from those Acroceraunian hills in Epirus, to
the Sunian promontory in Attica; Pagae and Magaera are the
two shoulders; that Isthmus of Corinth the neck; and
Peloponnesus the head. If this allusion holds 'tis sure a mad
head; Morea may be Moria, and to speak what I think, the
inhabitants of modern Greece swerve as much from reason and
true religion at this day, as that Morea doth from the
picture of a man. Examine the rest in like sort, and you
shall find that kingdoms and provinces are melancholy, cities
and families, all creatures, vegetal, sensible, and rational,
that all sorts, sects, ages, conditions, are out of tune, as
in Cebes' table, omnes errorem bibunt, before they come into
the world, they are intoxicated by error's cup, from the
highest to the lowest have need of physic, and those
particular actions in Seneca, where father and son prove one
another mad, may be general; Porcius Latro shall plead
against us all. For indeed who is not a fool, melancholy,
mad? -- Qui nil molitur inepte, who is not brain-sick? Folly,
melancholy, madness, are but one disease, Delirium is a
common name to all. Alexander, Gordonius, Jason Pratensis,
Savanarola, Guianerius, Montaltus, confound them as differing
secundum magis et minus; so doth David, Psal. xxxvii. 5. "I
said unto the fools, deal not so madly," and 'twas an old
Stoical paradox, omnes stultos insanire, all fools are mad,
though some madder than others. And who is not a fool, who is
free from melancholy? Who is not touched more or less in
habit or disposition? If in disposition, "ill dispositions
beget habits, if they persevere," saith Plutarch, habits
either are, or turn to diseases. 'Tis the same which Tully
maintains in the second of his Tusculans, omnium insipientum
animi in morbo sunt, et perturbatorum, fools are sick, and
all that are troubled in mind: for what is sickness, but as a
Gregory Tholosanus defines it, "A dissolution or perturbation
of the bodily league, which health combines:" and who is not
sick, or ill-disposed? in whom doth not passion, anger envy,
discontent, fear and sorrow reign? Who labours not of this
disease? Give me but a little leave, and you shall see by
what testimonies, confessions, arguments, I will evince it,
that most men are mad, that they had as much need to go a
pilgrimage to the Anticyrae (as in Strabo's time they did) as
in our days they run to Compostella, our Lady of Sichem, or
Lauretta, to seek for help; that it is like to be as
prosperous a voyage as that of Guiana, and that there is much
more need of hellebore than of tobacco.

That men are so misaffected, melancholy, mad, giddy-headed,
hear the testimony of Solomon, Eccl. ii. 12. "And I turned to
behold wisdom, madness and folly," &c. And ver. 23: "All his
days are sorrow, his travel grief, and his heart taketh no
rest in the night." So that take melancholy in what sense you
will, properly or improperly, in disposition or habit, for
pleasure or for pain, dotage, discontent, fear, sorrow,
madness, for part, or all, truly, or metaphorically, 'tis all
one. Laughter itself is madness according to Solomon, and as
St. Paul hath it, "Worldly sorrow brings death." "The hearts
of the sons of men are evil, and madness is in their hearts
while they live," Eccl. ix. 3. "Wise men themselves are no
better," Eccl. i. 18. "In the multitude of wisdom is much
grief, and he that increaseth wisdom increaseth sorrow,"
chap. ii. 17. He hated life itself; nothing pleased him: he
hated his labour, all, as he concludes is "sorrow, grief,
vanity, vexation of spirit." And though he were the wisest
man in the world, sanctuarium sapientiae, and had wisdom in
abundance, he will not vindicate himself; or justify his own
actions. "Surely I am more foolish than any man, and have not
the understanding of a man in me," Prov. xxx. 2. Be they
Solomon's words, or the words of Agur, the son of Jakeh, they
are canonical. David, a man after God's own heart, confesseth
as much of himself; Psal. xxxvii. 21, 22. "So foolish was I
and ignorant, I was even as a beast before thee." And
condemns all for fools, Psal. liii.; xxxii. 9; xlix. 20. He
compares them to "beasts, horses, and mules, in which there
is no understanding." The Apostle Paul accuseth himself in
like sort. 2 Cor. xi. 21. "I would you would suffer a little
my foolishness, I speak foolishly." "The whole head is sick,"
saith Esay, "and the heart is heavy," cap. i. 5. And makes
lighter of them than of oxen and asses, "the ox knows his
owner," &c.: read Deut. xxxii. 6; Jer. iv.; Amos, iii. 1;
Ephes. v. 6. "Be not mad, be not deceived, foolish Galatians,
who hath bewitched you?" How often are they branded with this
epithet of madness and folly? No word so frequent amongst the
fathers of the Church and divines; you may see what an
opinion they had of the world, and how they valued men's
action.

I know that we think far otherwise, and hold them most part
wise men that are in authority, princes, magistrates, rich
men, they are wise men born, all politicians and statesmen
must needs be so, for who dare speak against them? And on the
other, so corrupt is our judgment, we esteem wise and honest
men fools. Which Democritus well signified in an epistle of
his to Hippocrates: "the Abderites account virtue madness,"
and so do most men living. Shall I tell you the reason of it?
Fortune and Virtue, Wisdom and Folly, their seconds, upon a
time contended in the Olympics; every man thought that
Fortune and Folly would have the worst, and pitied their
cases; but it fell out otherwise. Fortune was blind and cared
not where she stroke, nor whom, without laws, Andabatarum
instar, &c. Folly, rash and inconsiderate, esteemed as little
what she said or did. Virtue and Wisdom gave place, were
hissed out, and exploded by the common people; Folly and
Fortune admired, and so are all their followers ever since:
knaves and fools commonly fare and deserve best in
worldlings' eyes and opinions. Many good men have no better
fate in their ages: Achish, 1 Sam. xxi. 14, held David for a
mad man. Elisha and the rest were no otherwise esteemed.
David was derided of the common people, Ps. ix. 7, "I am
become a monster to many." And generally we are accounted
fools for Christ, 1 Cor. xiv. "We fools thought his life
madness, and his end without honour," Wisd. v. 4. Christ and
his Apostles were censured in like sort, John x.; Mark iii.;
Acts xxvi. And so were all Christians in Pliny's time,
fuerunt et alii similis dementiae, &c. And called not long
after, Vesaniae sectatores, eversores hominum, polluti
novatores, fanatici, canes, malefici, venefici, Galilaei
homunciones, &c. 'Tis an ordinary thing with us, to account
honest, devout, orthodox, divine, religious, plain dealing
men, idiots, asses, that cannot, or will not lie and
dissemble, shift, flatter, accommodare se ad eum locum ubi
nati sunt, make good bargains, supplant, thrive, patronis
inservire; solennes ascendendi modos apprehendere, leges,
mores, consuetudines recte observare, candide laudare,
fortiter defendere, sententias amplecti, dubitare de nullis,
credere omnia, accipere omnia, nihil reprendere, caeteraque
qua promotionem ferunt et securitatem, qua sine ambage
foelicem reddunt hominem et vere sapientem apud nos; that
cannot temporise as other men do, hand and take bribes, &c.
but fear God, and make a conscience of their doings. But the
Holy Ghost that knows better how to judge, he calls them
fools "The fool hath said in his heart," Psal. liii. 1. "And
their ways utter their folly," Psal. xlix. 14. "For what can
be more mad, than for a little worldly pleasure to procure
unto themselves eternal punishment?" As Gregory and others
inculcate unto us.

Yea even all those great philosophers the world hath ever had
in admiration, whose works we do so much esteem, that gave
precepts of wisdom to others, inventors of Arts and Sciences,
Socrates the wisest man of his time by the Oracle of Apollo,
whom his two scholars, Plato and Xenophon, so much extol and
magnify with those honourable titles, "best and wisest of all
mortal men, the happiest, and most just;" and as Alcibiades
incomparably commends him; Achilles was a worthy man, but
Bracides and others were as worthy as himself; Anterior and
Nestor were as good as Pericles, and so of the rest; but none
present, before, or after Socrates, nemo veterum neque eorum
qui nunc sunt, were ever such, will match, or come near him.
Those seven wise men of Greece, those Britain Druids, Indian
Brachmanni, Aethiopian Gymnosophists, Magi of the Persians,
Apollonius, of whom Philostratus, Non doctus, sed natus
sapiens, wise from his cradle, Epicurus so much admired by
his scholar Lucretius:

Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, et omnes
Perstrinxit stellas exortus ut aetherius sol.
Whose wit excell'd the wits of men as far,
As the sun rising doth obscure a star,
Or that so much renowned Empedocles.

Ut vix humana videatur stirpe creatus.

All those of whom we read such hyperbolical eulogiums, as of
Aristotle, that he was wisdom itself in the abstract, a
miracle of nature, breathing libraries, as Eunapius of
Longinus, lights of nature, giants for wit, quintessence of 
wit, divine spirits, eagles in the clouds, fallen from
heaven, gods, spirits, lamps of the world, dictators, Nulla
ferant talem secla futura virum: monarchs, miracles,
superintendents of wit and learning, oceanus, phoenix, atlas,
monstrum, portentum hominis, orbis universi musaeum, ultimus
humanae naturae conatus, naturae maritus.

 -- merito cui doctior orbis
Submissis defert fascibus imperium.

As Aelian writ of Protagoras and Gorgias, we may say of them
all, tantum a sapientibus abfuerunt, quantum a viris pueri,
they were children in respect, infants, not eagles, but
kites; novices, illiterate, Eunuchi sapientiae. And although
they were the wisest, and most admired in their age, as he
censured Alexander, I do them, there were 10,000 in his army
as worthy captains (had they been in place of command), as
valiant as himself; there were myriads of men wiser in those
days, and yet all short of what they ought to be. Lactantius,
in his book of wisdom, proves them to be dizzards, fools,
asses, mad men, so full of absurd and ridiculous tenets, and
brain-sick positions, that to his thinking never any old
woman or sick person doted worse. Democritus took all from
Leucippus, and left saith he, "the inheritance of his folly
to Epicurus," insanienti dum sapientiae, &c. The like he
holds of Plato, Aristippus, and the rest, making no
difference, "betwixt them and beasts, saving that they could
speak." Theodoret in his tract, De cur. grec. affect.
manifestly evinces as much of Socrates, whom though that
Oracle of Apollo confirmed to be the wisest man then living,
and saved him from plague, whom 2000 years have admired, of
whom some will as soon speak evil as of Christ, yet revera,
he was an illiterate idiot, as Aristophanes calls him,
irrisor et ambitiosus, as his master Aristotle terms him,
scurra Atticus, as Zeno, an enemy to all arts and sciences,
as Athaeneus, to philosophers and travellers, an opinionative
ass, a caviller, a kind of pedant; for his manners, as Theod.
Cyrensis describes him, a sodomite, an atheist, (so convict
by Anytus) iracundus et ebrius, dicax, &c. a pot-companion,
by Plato's own confession, a sturdy drinker; and that of all
others he was most sottish, a very madman in his actions and
opinions. Pythagoras was part philosopher, part magician, or
part witch. If you desire to hear more of Apollonius, a great
wise man, sometime paralleled by Julian the apostate to
Christ, I refer you to that learned tract of Eusebias against
Hierocles, and for them all to Lucian's Piscator,
Icaromenippus, Necyomantia: their actions, opinions in
general were so prodigious, absurd, ridiculous, which they
broached and maintained, their books and elaborate treatises
were fall of dotage, which Tully ad Atticum long since
observed, delirant plerumque scriptores in libris suis, their
lives being opposite to their words, they commended poverty
to others, and were most covetous themselves, extolled love
and peace, and yet persecuted one another with virulent hate
and malice. They could give precepts for verse and prose, but
not a man of them (as Seneca tells then home) could moderate
his affections. Their music did show us flebiles modos, &c.
how to rise and fall, but they could not so contain
themselves as in adversity not to make a lamentable tone.
They will measure ground by geometry, set down limits, divide
and subdivide, but cannot yet prescribe quantum homini satis,
or keep within compass of reason and discretion. They can
square circles, but understand not the state of their own
souls, describe right lines and crooked, &c. but know not
what is right in this life, quid in vita rectum sit,
ignorant; so that as he said, nescio an Anticyram ratio illis
destinet omnem, I think all the Anticyrae will not restore
them to their wits, if these men now, that held Xenodotus'
heart, Crates' liver, Epictetus' lanthorn, were so sottish,
and had no more brains than so many beetles, what shall we
think of the commonalty? what of the rest?

Yea, but will you infer, that is true of heathens, if they be
conferred with christians, 1 Cor. iii. 19. "The wisdom of
this world is foolishness with God, earthly and devilish," as
James calls it, iii. 15. "They were vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darkness,"
Rom. i. 21, 22. "When they professed themselves wise, became
fools." Their witty works are admired here on earth, whilst
their souls are tormented in hell fire. In some sense,
Christiani Crassiani, Christians are Crassians, and if
compared to that wisdom, no better than fools. Quis est
sapiens? Solus Deus, Pythagoras replies, "God is only wise,"
Rom. xvi. Paul determines "only good," as Austin well
contends, "and no man living can be justified in his sight."
"God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see
if any did understand," Psalm liii 2,3. but all are corrupt,
err. Rom. iii. 12, "None doth good, no not one." Job
aggravates this, iv. 18, "Behold he found no steadfastness in
his servants, and laid folly upon his angel;" 19. "How much
more on them that dwell in houses of clay?" In this sense we
are all fools, and the Scripture alone is arx Minervae, we
and our writings are shallow and imperfect. But I do not so
mean; even in our ordinary dealings we are no better than
fools. "All our actions," as Pliny, told Trajan, "upbraid us
of folly," our whole course of life is but matter of
laughter: we are not soberly wise; and the world itself which
ought at least to be wise by reason of his antiquity, as Hugo
de Prato Florido will have it, semper stultizat, is every day
more foolish than other; the more it is whipped, the worse it
is, and as a child will still be crowned with roses and
flowers. "We are apish in it, asini bipedes, and every place
is full inversorum Apuleiorum, of metamorphosed and two-
legged asses, inversorum Silenorum, childish, pueri instar
bimuli, tremula patris dormientis in ulna. Jovianus Pontanus,
Antonio Dial, brings in some laughing at an old man, that by
reason of his age was a little fond, but as he admonisheth
there, Ne mireris mi hospes de hoc sene, marvel not at him
only, for tota haec civitas delirat, all our town dotes in
like sort, we are a company of fools. Ask not with him in the
poet, Larvae hunc intemperia insaniaeque agitant senem? What
madness ghosts this old man, but what madness ghosts us all?
For we are ad unum omnes, all mad, semel insanivimus omnes,
not once, but always so, et semel, et simul, et semper, ever
and altogether as bad as he; and not senex bis puer, delira
anus, but say it of us all, semper pueri, young and old, all
dote, as Lactantius proves out of Seneca; and no difference
betwixt us and children, saving that, majora ludimus, et
grandioribus pupis, they play with babies of clouts and such
toys, we sport with greater baubles. We cannot accuse or
condemn one another, being faulty ourselves, deliramenta
loqueris, you talk idly, or as Mitio upbraided Demea,
insanis, auferte, for we are as mad our ownselves, and it is
hard to say which is the worst. Nay, 'tis universally so,
Vitam regit fortuna, non sapientia. (Fortune, not wisdom,
governs our lives.)

When Socrates had taken great pains to find out a wise man,
and to that purpose had consulted with philosophers, poets,
artificers, he concludes all men were fools; and though it
procured him both anger and much envy, yet in all companies
he would openly profess it. When Supputius in Pontanus had
travelled all over Europe to confer with a wise man, he
returned at last without his errand, and could find none.
Cardan concurs with him, "Few there are (for aught I can
perceive) well in their wits." So doth Tully, "I see every
thing to be done foolishly and unadvisedly."

Ille sinistrorsum, hic dextrorsum, unus utrique
Error, sed variis illudit partibus omnes.
One reels to this, another to that wall;
'Tis the same error that deludes them all.

They dote all, but not alike, ????? ??? ????? ???? (mania gar
patis omoa), not in the same kind, "One is covetous, a second
lascivious, a third ambitious, a fourth envious," &c. as
Damasippus the Stoic hath well illustrated in the poet,

Desipiunt omnes aeque ac tu.
And they who call you fool, with equal claim
May plead an ample title to the name.

'Tis an inbred malady in every one of us, there is seminarium
stultitae, a seminary of folly, "which if it be stirred up,
or get ahead, will run in infinitum, and infinitely varies,
as we ourselves are severally addicted," saith Balthazar
Castilio: and cannot so easily be rooted out, it takes such
fast hold, as Tully holds, alte radices stultitiae, we are
bred, and so we continue. Some say there be two main defects
of wit, error, and ignorance, to which all others are
reduced; by ignorance we know not things necessary, by error
we know them falsely. Ignorance is a privation, error a
positive act. From ignorance comes vice, from error, heresy,
&c. But make how many kinds you will, divide and subdivide,
few men are free, or that do not impinge on some one kind or
other. Sic plerumque agitat stultos inscitia, (their wits are
a wool-gathering. So fools commonly dote,) as he that
examines his own and other men's actions shall find.

Charon in Lucian, as he wittily feigns, was conducted by
Mercury to such a place, where he might see all the world at
once; after he had sufficiently viewed, and looked about,
Mercury would needs know of him what he had observed: He told
him that he saw a vast multitude and a promiscuous, their
habitations like molehills, the men as emmets, "he could
discern cities like so many hives of bees, wherein every bee
had a sting, and they did nought else but sting one another,
some domineering like hornets bigger than the rest, some like
filching wasps, others as drones." Over their heads were
hovering a confused company of perturbations, hope, fear,
anger, avarice, ignorance, &c., and a multitude of diseases
hanging, which they still pulled on their pates. Some were
brawling, some fighting, riding, running, sollicite
ambientes, callide litigantes, for toys and trifles, and such
momentary things. Their towns and provinces mere factions,
rich against poor, poor against rich, nobles against
artificers, they against nobles, and so the rest. In
conclusion, he condemned them all for madmen, fools, idiots,
asses, O stulti, quaenam haec est amentia? O fools, O madmen,
he exclaims, insana studia, insani labores, &c. Mad
endeavours, mad actions, mad, mad, mad, O seclum insipiens &
infacetum, a giddy-headed age. Heraclitus the philosopher,
out of a serious meditation of men's lives, fell a weeping,
and with continual tears bewailed their misery, madness, and
folly. Democritus on the other side, burst out a laughing,
their whole life seemed to him so ridiculous, and he was so
far carried with this ironical passion, that the citizens of
Abdera took him to be mad, and sent therefore ambassadors to 
Hippocrates, the physician, that he would exercise his skill
upon him. But the story is set down at large by Hippocrates,
in his epistle to Damogetus, which because it is not
impertinent to this discourse, I will insert verbatim almost
as it is delivered by Hippocrates himself, with all the
circumstances belonging unto it.

When Hippocrates was now come to Abdera, the people of the
city came flocking about him, some weeping, some entreating
of him, that he would do his best. After some little repast,
he went to see Democritus, the people following him, whom he
found (as before) in his garden in the suburbs all alone,
"sitting upon a stone under a plane tree, without hose or
shoe; with a book on his knees, cutting up several beasts, 
and busy at his study." The multitude stood gazing round
about to see the congress. Hippocrates, after a little pause,
saluted him by his name, whom he resaluted, ashamed almost
that he could not call him likewise by his, or that he had
forgot it. Hippocrates demanded of him what he was doing: he
told him that he was "busy in cutting up several beasts, to
find out the cause of madness and melancholy." Hippocrates
commended his work, admiring his happiness and leisure. And
why, quoth Democritus, have not you that leisure? Because,
replied Hippocrates, domestic affairs hinder, necessary to be
done for ourselves, neighbours, friends; expenses, disease,
frailties and mortalities which happen; wife, children,
servants, and such businesses which deprive us of our time.
At this speech Democritus profusely laughed (his friends and
the people standing by, weeping in the meantime, and
lamenting his madness). Hippocrates asked the reason why he
laughed. He told him, at the vanities and the fopperies of
the time, to see men so empty of all virtuous actions, to
hunt so far after gold, having no end of ambition; to take
such infinite pains for a little glory, and to be favoured of
men; to make such deep mines into the earth for gold, and
many times to find nothing, with loss of their lives and
fortunes. Some to love dogs, others horses, some to desire to
be obeyed in many provinces, and yet themselves will know no
obedience. Some to love their wives dearly at first, and
after a while to forsake and hate them; begetting children,
with much care and cost for their education, yet when they
grow to man's estate, to despise, neglect, and leave them
naked to the world's mercy. Do not these behaviours express
their intolerable folly? When men live in peace, they covet
war, detesting quietness, deposing kings, and advancing
others in their stead, murdering some men to beget children
of their wives. How many strange humours are in men! When
they are poor and needy, they seek riches, and when they have
them, they do not enjoy them, but hide them underground, or
else wastefully spend them. O wise Hippocrates, I laugh at
such things being done, but much more when no good comes of
them, and when they are done to so ill purpose. There is no
truth or justice found amongst them, for they daily plead one
against another, the son against the father and the mother,
brother against brother, kindred and friends of the same
quality; and all this for riches, whereof after death they
cannot be possessors. And yet notwithstanding they will
defame and kill one another, commit all unlawful actions,
contemning God and men, friends and country. They make great
account of many senseless things, esteeming them as a great
part of their treasure, statues, pictures, and such like
movables, dear bought, and so cunningly wrought, as nothing
but speech wanteth in them, and yet they hate living persons
speaking to them. Others affect difficult things; if they
dwell on firm land they will remove to an island, and thence
to land again, being no way constant to their desires. They
commend courage and strength in wars, and let themselves be
conquered by lust and avarice; they are, in brief, as
disordered in their minds, as Thersites was in his body. And
now, methinks, O most worthy Hippocrates, you should not
reprehend my laughing, perceiving so many fooleries in men;
for no man will mock his own folly, but that which he seeth
in a second, and so they justly mock one another. The
drunkard calls him a glutton whom he knows to be sober. Many
men love the sea, others husbandry; briefly, they cannot
agree in their own trades and professions, much less in their
lives and actions.

When Hippocrates heard these words so readily uttered,
without premeditation, to declare the world's vanity, full of
ridiculous contrariety, he made answer, that necessity
compelled men to many such actions, and divers wills ensuing
from divine permission, that we might not be idle; being
nothing is so odious to them as sloth and negligence.
Besides, men cannot foresee future events, in this
uncertainty of human affairs; they would not so marry, if
they could foretel the causes of their dislike and
separation; or parents, if they knew the hour of their
children's death, so tenderly provide for them; or an
husbandman sow, if he thought there would be no increase; or
a merchant adventure to sea, if he foresaw shipwreck; or be a
magistrate, if presently to be deposed. Alas, worthy
Democritus, every man hopes the best, and to that end he doth
it, and therefore no such cause, or ridiculous occasion of
laughter.

Democritus hearing this poor excuse, laughed again aloud,
perceiving he wholly mistook him, and did not well understand
what he had said concerning perturbations and tranquillity of
the mind. Insomuch, that if men would govern their actions by
discretion and providence, they would not declare themselves
fools as now they do, and he should have no cause of
laughter; but (quoth he) they swell in this life as if they
were immortal, and demigods, for want of understanding. It
were enough to make them wise, if they would but consider the
mutability of this world, and how it wheels about, nothing
being firm and sure. He that is now above, to-morrow is
beneath; he that sate on this side to-day, to-morrow is
hurled on the other: and not considering these matters, they
fall into many inconveniences and troubles, coveting things
of no profit, and thirsting after them, tumbling headlong
into many calamities. So that if men would attempt no more
than what they can bear, they should lead contented lives,
and learning to know themselves, would limit their ambition,
they would perceive then that nature hath enough without
seeking such superfluities, and unprofitable things, which
bring nothing with them but grief and molestation. As a fat
body is more subject to diseases, so are rich men to
absurdities and fooleries, to many casualties and cross
inconveniences. There are many that take no heed what
happeneth to others by bad conversation, and therefore
overthrow themselves in the same manner through their own
fault, not foreseeing dangers manifest. These are things (O
more than mad, quoth he) that give me matter of laughter, by
suffering the pains of your impieties, as your avarice, envy,
malice, enormous villainies, mutinies, unsatiable desires,
conspiracies, and other incurable vices; besides your
dissimulation and hypocrisy, bearing deadly hatred one to the
other, and yet shadowing it with a good face, flying out into
all filthy lusts, and transgressions of all laws, both of
nature and civility. Many things which they have left off,
after a while they fall to again, husbandry, navigation; and
leave again, fickle and inconstant as they are. When they are
young, they would be old; and old, young. Princes commend a
private life; private men itch after honour: a magistrate
commends a quiet life; a quiet man would be in his office,
and obeyed as he is: and what is the cause of all this, but
that they know not themselves? Some delight to destroy, one
to build, another to spoil one country to enrich another and
himself. In all these things they are like children, in whom
is no judgment or counsel and resemble beasts, saving that
beasts are better than they, as being contented with nature.
When shall you see a lion hide gold in the ground, or a bull
contend for better pasture? When a boar is thirsty, he drinks
what will serve him, and no more; and when his belly is full,
ceaseth to eat: but men are immoderate in both, as in lust --
they covet carnal copulation at set times; men always,
ruinating thereby the health of their bodies. And doth it not
deserve laughter to see an amorous fool torment himself for a
wench; weep, howl for a mis-shapen slut, a dowdy sometime;
that might have his choice of the finest beauties? Is there
any remedy for this in physic? I do anatomise and cut up
these poor beasts, to see these distempers, vanities, and
follies, yet such proof were better made on man's body, if my
kind nature would endure it: who from the hour of his birth
is most miserable, weak, and sickly; when he sucks he is 
guided by others, when he is grown great practiseth
unhappiness and is sturdy, and when old, a child again, and
repenteth him of his life past. And here being interrupted by
one that brought books, he fell to it again, that all were
mad, careless, stupid. To prove my former speeches, look into
courts, or private houses. Judges give judgment according to
their own advantage, doing manifest wrong to poor innocents
to please others. Notaries alter sentence; and for money lose
their deeds. Some make false monies; others counterfeit false
weights. Some abuse their parents, yea corrupt their own
sisters; others make long libels and pasquils, defaming men
of good life, and extol such as are lewd and vicious. Some
rob one, some another: magistrates make laws against thieves,
and are the veriest thieves themselves. Some kill themselves,
others despair, not obtaining their desires. Some dance,
sing, laugh, feast and banquet, whilst others sigh, languish,
mourn and lament, having neither meat, drink, nor clothes.
Some prank up their bodies, and have their minds full of
execrable vices. Some trot about to bear false witness, and
say anything for money; and though judges know of it, yet for
a bribe they wink at it, and suffer false contracts to
prevail against equity. Women are all day a dressing, to
pleasure other men abroad, and go like sluts at home, not
caring to please their own husbands whom they should. Seeing
men are so fickle, so sottish, so intemperate, why should not
I laugh at those to whom folly seems wisdom, will not be
cured, and perceive it not?

It grew late: Hippocrates left him; and no sooner was he come
away, but all the citizens came about flocking, to know how
he liked him. He told then in brief that notwithstanding
those small neglects of his attire, body, diet, the world had
not a wiser, a more learned, a more honest man, and they were
much deceived to say that he was mad.

Thus Democritus esteemed of the world in his time, and this
was the causes of his laughter: and good cause he had.

Olim jure quildem, nunc plus Democtrite ride;
Quin rides? vita haec nunc mage ridicula est.
Democritus did well to laugh of old.
Good cause he had, but now much more;
This life of ours is more ridiculous
Than that of his, or long before.

Never so much cause of laughter as now, never so many fools
and madmen. 'Tis not one Democritus will serve turn to laugh
in these days; we have now need of a "Democritus to laugh at
Democritus;" one jester to flout at another, one fool to
flare at another: a great stentorian Democritus, as big as
that Rhodian Colossus. For now, as said in his time, totus
mundus histrionem agit, the whole world plays the fool; we
have a new theatre, a new scene, a new comedy of errors, a
new company of personate actors, volupiae sacra (as
Calcagninus willingly feigns in his Apologues) are celebrated
all the world over, where all the actors were madmen and
fools, and every hour changed habits, or took that which came
next. He that was a mariner to-day, is an apothecary to-
morrow; a smith one while, a philosopher another, in his
volupiae ludis; a king now with his crown, robes, sceptre,
attendants, by and by drove a loaded ass before him like a
carter, &c. If Democritus were alive now, he should see
strange alterations, a new company of counterfeit vizards,
whifflers, Cumane asses, maskers, mummers, painted puppets,
outsides, fantastic shadows, gulls, monsters, giddy-heads,
butterflies. And so many of them are indeed (if all be true
that I have read). For when Jupiter and Juno's wedding was
solemnized of old the gods were all invited to the feast, and
many noble men besides: Amongst the rest came Crysalus, a
Persian prince, bravely attended, rich in golden attires, in
gay robes, with a majestical presence, but otherwise an ass.
The gods seeing him come in such pomp and state, rose up to
give him place, ex habitus hominem metientes; but Jupiter
perceiving what he was, a light, fantastic, idle fellow,
turned him and his proud followers into butterflies: and so
they continue still (for aught I know to the contrary) roving
about in pied coats, and are called chrysalides by the wiser
sort of men: that is, golden outsides, drones, flies, and
things of no worth. Multitudes of such, &c.

"-- ubique invenies
Stultos avaros, sycophantes prodigos."
(You will meet covetous fools and prodigal sycophants
everywhere)

Many additions, much increase of madness, folly, vanity,
should Democritus observe, were he now to travel, or could
get leave of Pluto to come see fashions, as Charon did in
Lucian to visit our cities of Moronia Pia, and Moronia
Foelix: sure I think he would break the rim of his belly with
laughing. Si foret in terris rideret Democritus, seu. &c.

A satirical Roman in his time, thought all vice, folly, and
madness were all at full sea, Omne in praecipiti vitium
stetit.

Josephus the historian taxeth his countrymen Jews for
bragging of their vices, publishing their follies, and that
they did contend amongst themselves who should be most
notorious in villanies; but we flow higher in madness, far
beyond them,

"Mox daturi progeniem vitiosiorem"
And yet with crimes to us unknown,
Our sons shall mark the coming age their own,

and the latter end (you know whose oracle it is) is like to
be worse. 'Tis not to be denied, the world alters every day,
Ruunt urbes, regna transferuntur, &c. variantur habitus,
leges innovantur, as Petrarch observes, we change language,
habit; laws, customs, manners, but not vice; not diseases,
not the symptoms of folly and madness, they are still the
same. And as a river, we see, keeps the like name and place,
but not water, and yet ever runs, Labitur et labetur in omne
volubilis oevum; our times and persons alter, vices are the
same, and ever will be; look how nightingales sang of old,
cocks crowed, kine lowed, sheep bleated, sparrows chirped,
dogs barked, so they do still: we keep our madness still,
play the fools still, nec dum finitus Orestes; we are of the
same humours and inclinations as our predecessors were; you
shall find us all alike, much at one, we and our sons, et
nati natorum, et qui nascuntur ab illis. And so shall our
posterity continue to the last. But to speak of times
present.

If Democritus were alive now, and. should but see the
superstition of our age, our religious madness, as Meteran
calls it, Religiosam insaniam, so many professed Christians,
yet so few imitators of Christ; so much talk of religion, so
much science, so little conscience; so much knowledge, so
many preachers, so little practice; such variety of sects,
such have and hold of all sides, -- obvia signis Sigma, &c.,
such absurd and ridiculous traditions and ceremonies: If he
should meet Father Angelo, the Duke of Joyeux, going barefoot
over the Alps to Rome, &c., a Capuchin, a Franciscan, a
Pharisaical Jesuit, a man-serpent, a shave-crowned Monk in
his robe, a begging Friar, or see their three-crowned
Sovereign Lord the Pope, poor Peter's successor, servus
servorum Dei, to depose kings with his foot, to tread on
emperors' neck; make them stand barefoot and bare-legged at
his gate; hold his bridle and stirrup, &c. (O that Peter and
Paul were alive to see this!) If he should observe a Prince
creep so devoutly to kiss his toe, and those Red-cap
Cardinals, poor parish priests of old, now Princes'
companions; what would he say? Coelum ipsum petitur
stultitia. Had he met some of our devout pilgrims going
barefoot to Jerusalem, our lady of Lauretto, Rome, S. Iago,
S. Thomas' Shrine, to creep to those counterfeit and maggot-
eaten reliques; had he been present at a mass, and seen such
kissing of Paxes, crucifixes, cringes, duckings, their
several attires and ceremonies, pictures of saints,
indulgences, pardon; vigils, fasting, feasts, crossing,
knocking, kneeling at Ave-Marias, bells, with many such;
jucunda rudi spectacula plebis (pleasing spectacles to the
ignorant poor), praying in gibberish, and mumbling of beads.
Had he heard an old woman say her prayers in Latin, their
sprinkling of holy water, and going a procession,
"-- incedunt monachorum agmina mille;
Quid memorem vexilla, cruces, idolaque culta, &c."

Their breviaries, bulls, hallowed beans, exorcisms, pictures,
curious crosses, fables, and baubles. Had he read the Golden
Legend, the Turks' Alcoran, or Jews' Talmud, the Rabbins'
Comments, what would he have thought? How dost thou think he
might have been affected? Had he more particularly examined a
Jesuit's life amongst the rest, he should have seen an
hypocrite profess poverty, and yet possess more goods and
lands than many princes, to have infinite treasures and
revenues; teach others to fast, and play the gluttons
themselves; like the watermen that row one way and look
another. Vow virginity, talk of holiness, and yet indeed a
notorious bawd, and famous fornicator, lascivum pecus, a very
goat. Monks by profession, such as give over the world and
the vanities of it, and yet a Machiavelian rout interested in
all manner of state: holy men, peace makers, and yet composed
of envy, lust, ambition, hatred, and malice; fire-brands,
adulta patriae pestis, traitors, assassinats, haec itur ad
astra, and this is to supererogate, and merit heaven for
themselves and others. Had he seen on the adverse side, some
of our nice and curious schismatics in another extreme, abhor
all ceremonies, and rather lose their lives and livings, than
do or admit anything Papists have formerly used, though in
things indifferent, (they alone are the true Church, sal
terrae, cum sint omnium insulsissimi). Formalists, out of
fear and base flattery, like so many weather-cocks turn 
round, a rout of temporisers, ready to embrace and maintain
all that is or shall be proposed in hope of preferment:
another Epicurean company, lying at lurch like so many
vultures, watching for a prey of Church goods, and ready to
rise by the downfal of any: as Lucian said in like case, what
dost thou think Democritus would have done, had he been
spectator of these things?

Or had he but observed the common people follow like so many
sheep one of their fellows drawn by the horns over the gap,
some for zeal, some for fear, quo se cunque rapit tempestas,
to credit all, examine nothing, and yet ready to die before
they will adjure any of those ceremonies to which they have
been accustomed? others out of hypocrisy frequent sermons,
knock their breasts, turn up their eyes, pretend zeal, desire
reformation, and yet professed usurers, gripers, monsters of
men, harpies, devils in their lives, to express nothing less.

What would he have said to see, hear, and read so many bloody
battles, so many thousands slain at once, such streams of
blood able to turn mills: unius ob noxam furiasque, or to
make sport for princes, without any just cause, "for vain
titles (saith Austin), precedency, some wench, or such like
toy, or out of desire of domineering, vain glory, malice,
revenge, folly, madness," (goodly causes all, ob quas
universus orbis bellis et coedibus misceatur,) whilst
statesmen themselves in the mean time are secure at home,
pampered with all delights and pleasures, take their ease,
and follow their lust; not considering what intolerable
misery poor soldiers endure, their often wounds, hunger,
thirst, &c., the lamentable cares, torments, calamities, and
oppressions that accompany such proceedings, they feel not,
take no notice of it. So wars are begun, by the persuasion of
a few debauched, hair-brain, poor, dissolute, hungry
captains, parasitical fawners, unquiet Hotspurs, restless
innovators, green heads, to satisfy one man's private spleen,
lust, ambition, avarice, &c.; tales rapiunt scelerata in
proelia causae. Flos hominum, proper men, well proportioned,
carefully brought up, able both in body and mind, sound, led
like so many beasts to the slaughter in the flower of their
years, pride, and full strength, without all remorse and
pity, sacrificed to Pluto, killed up as so many sheep, for
devils' food, 40,000 at once. At once, said I, that were
tolerable, but these wars last always, and for many ages;
nothing so familiar as this backing and hewing, massacres,
murders, desolations -- ignoto coelum clangore remugit, they
care not what mischief they procure, so that they may enrich
themselves for the present; they will so long blow the coals
of contention, till all the world be consumed with fire. The
siege of Troy lasted ten years, eight months, there died
870,000 Grecians, 670,000 Trojans, at the taking of the city,
and after were slain 276,000 men, women, and children of all
sorts. Caesar killed a million, Mahomet the second Turk,
300,000 persons; Sicinius Dentatus fought in a hundred
battles, eight times in single combat he overcame, had forty
wounds before, was rewarded with 140 crowns, triumphed nine
times for his good service. M. Sergius had 32 wounds; Scaeva,
the Centurion, I know not how many; every nation had their
Hectors, Scipios, Caesars, and Alexanders! Our Edward the
Fourth was in 26 battles afoot: and as they do all, he
glories in it, 'tis related to his honour. At the siege of
Hierusalem, 1,100,000 died with sword and famine. At the
battle of Cannae, 70,000 men were slain, as Polybius records,
and as many at Battle Abbey with us; and 'tis no news to
fight from sun to sun, as they did, as Constantine and
Licinius, &c. At the siege of Ostend (the devil's academy) a
poor town in respect, a small fort, but a great grave,
120,000 men lost their lives, besides whole towns, dorpes,
and hospitals full of maimed soldiers; there were engines,
fire-works, and whatsoever the devil could invent to do
mischief with 2,500,000 iron bullets shot of 40 pounds
weight, three or four millions of gold consumed. "Who (saith
mine author) can be sufficiently amazed at their flinty
hearts, obstinacy, fury, blindness, who without any
likelihood of good success, hazard poor soldiers, and lead
them without pity to the slaughter, which may justly be
called the rage of furious beasts, that run without reason
upon their own deaths: "quis malus genius, quae furia, quae
pestis,"  &c.; what plague, what fury brought so devilish, so
brutish a thing as war first into men's minds? Who made so
soft and peaceable a creature, born to love, mercy, meekness,
so to rave, rage like beasts, and run on to their own
destruction? how may nature expostulate with mankind, Ego te
divinum animal finxi, &c.? I made thee an harmless, quiet, a
divine creature: how may God expostulate, and all good men?
yet, horum facta (as one condoles) tantum admirantur, et
heroum numero habent: these are the brave spirits, the
gallants of the world, these admired alone, triumph alone,
have statues, crowns, pyramids, obelisks to their eternal
fame, that immortal genius attends on them, hac itur ad
astra. When Rhodes was besieged, fossae urbis cadaveribus
repletae sunt, the ditches were full of dead carcasses: and
as when the said Solyman, the great Turk, beleaguered Vienna,
they lay level with the top of the walls. This they make a
sport of; and will do it to their friends and confederates,
against oaths, vows, promises, by treachery or otherwise; --
dolus an virtus? quis in hoste requirat? leagues and laws of
arms, (silent leges inter arma,) for their advantage, omnia
jura, divina, humana, proculcata plerumque sunt; God's and
men's laws are trampled under foot, the sword alone
determines all; to satisfy their lust and spleen, they care
not what they attempt, say, or do, Rara fides, probitas quo
viris qui rastra sequuntur. Nothing so common as to have
"father fight against the son, brother against brother,
kinsman against kinsman, kingdom against kingdom, province
against province, christians against christians:" a quibus
nec unquam cogitatione fuerunt laesi, of whom they never had
offence in thought, word or deed. Infinite treasures
consumed, towns burned, flourishing cities sacked and
ruinated, quodque animus meminisse horret, goodly countries
depopulated and left desolate, old inhabitants expelled,
trade and traffic decayed, maids deflowered, Virgines nondum
thalamis jugatae, et comis nondum positis ephoebi; chaste
matrons cry out with Andromache, Concubitum mox aegar pati
ejus, qui interemit Hectorem, they shall be compelled
peradventure to lie with them that erst killed their
husbands: to see rich, poor, sick, sound, lords, servants,
eodem omnes incommodo macti, consumed all or maimed, &c. Et
quicquid gaudens scelere animus audet, a perversa mens, saith
Cyprian, and whatsoever torment, misery, mischief; hell
itself; the devil, fury and rage can invent to their own ruin
and destruction; so abominable a thing is war, as Gerbelius
concludes, adeo foeda et abominanda res est bellum, ex quo
hominum caedes, vastationes. &c., the scourge of God, cause,
effect, fruit and punishment of sin, and not tonsura humani
generis, as Tertullian calls it, but ruina. Had Democritus
been present at the late civil wars in France, those
abominable wars  -- bellaque matribus detestata, "where, in
less than ten years, ten thousand men were consumed, saith
Cullignias, 20 thousand churches overthrown; nay, the whole
kingdom subverted (as Richard Dinoth adds). So many myriads
of the commons were butchered up, with sword, famine, war,
tanto odio utrinque ut barbari ad abhorrendum lanienam
obstupescerent, with such feral hatred, the world was amazed
at it: or at our late Pharsalian fields in the time of Henry
the Sixth, betwixt the houses of Lancaster and York, a
hundred thousand men slain, one writes; another, ten thousand
families were rooted out, "That no man can but marvel, saith
Comineus, at that barbarous immanity, feral madness,
committed between men of the same nation, language, and
religion." Quis furor, O cives? "Why do the Gentiles so
furiously rage," saith the Prophet David, Psal. ii. 1. But we
may ask, why do the Christians so furiously rage? "Arma
volunt, quare poscunt, rapiuntque juventus?" Unfit for
Gentiles, much less for us so to tyrannize, as the Spaniard
in the West Indies, that killed up in 42 years (if we may
believe Bartholomeus a Casa, their own bishop) 12 millions of
men, with stupend and exquisite torments; neither should I
lie (said he) if I said 50 millions. I omit those French
massacres, Sicilian evensongs, the Duke of Alva's tyrannies,
our gunpowder machinations, and that fourth fury, as one
calls it, the Spanish inquisition, which quite obscures those
ten persecutions, -- saevit toto Mars impius orbe. Is not
this mundus furiosus a mad world, as he terms it, insanum
bellum? are not these mad men, as Scaliger concludes, qui in
praelio acerba morte, insaniae suae memoriam perpetuo teste
relinquunt posteritati; which leave so frequent battles, as
perpetual memorials of their madness to all succeeding ages?
Would this, think you, have enforced our Democritus to
laughter, or rather make him turn his tune, alter his tone,
and weep with Heraclitus, or rather howl, roar, and tear his
hair in commiseration, stand amazed; or as the poets feign,
that Niobe was for grief quite stupefied, and turned to a
stone? I have not yet said the worst, that which is more
absurd and mad, in their tumults, seditions, civil and unjust
wars, quod stulte suscipitur, impie geritur, misere finitur.
Such wars I mean; for all are not to be condemned, as those
fantastical anabaptists vainly conceive. Our Christian
tactics are all out as necessary as the Roman acies, or
Grecian phalanx; to be a soldier is a most noble and
honourable profession (as the world is), not to be spared,
they are our best walls and bulwarks, and I do therefore
acknowledge that of Tully to be most true, "All our civil
affairs, all our studies, all our pleading, industry, and
commendation lies under the protection of warlike virtues,
and whensoever there is any suspicion of tumult, all our arts
cease;" wars are most behoveful, et bellatores agricolis
civitati sunt utiliores, as Tyrius defends: and valour is
much to be commended in a wise man; but they mistake most
part, auferre, trucidare, rapere, falsis nominibus virtutem
vocant, &c. ('Twas Galgacus' observation in Tacitus) they
term theft, murder, and rapine, virtue, by a wrong name,
rapes, slaughters, massacres, &c. jocus et ludus, are pretty
pastimes, as Ludovicus Vives notes. "They commonly call the
most hair-brain blood-suckers, strongest thieves, the most
desperate villains, treacherous rogues, inhuman murderers,
rash, cruel and dissolute caitiffs, courageous and generous
spirits, heroical and worthy captains, brave men at arms,
valiant and renowned soldiers, possessed with a brute
persuasion of false honour," as Pontus Huter in his
Burgundian history complains. By means of which it comes to
pass that daily so many voluntaries offer themselves, leaving
their sweet wives, children, friends, for sixpence (if they
can get it) a day, prostitute their lives and limb; desire to
enter upon breaches, lie sentinel, perdue, give the first
onset, stand in the fore front of the battle, marching
bravely on, with a cheerful noise of drums and trumpets, such
vigour and alacrity, so many banners streaming in the air,
glittering armours, motions of plumes, woods of pikes, and
swords, variety of colour; cost and magnificence, as if they
went in triumph, now victors to the Capitol, and with such
pomp, as when Darius' army marched to meet Alexander at
Issus. Void of all fear they run into imminent dangers,
cannon's mouth, &c., ut vulneribus suit ferrum hostium
hebetent, saith Barletius, to get a name of valour, honour
and applause, which lasts not neither, for it is but a mere
flash this fame, and, like a rose, intra diem unum
extinguitur, 'tis gone in an instant. Of 15,000 proletaries
slain in a battle, scarce fifteen are recorded in history, or
one alone, the General perhaps, and after a while his and
their names are likewise blotted out, the whole battle itself
is forgotten. Those Grecian orators, summa vi ingenii et
eloquentiae, set out the renowned overthrows at Thermopylae,
Salamis, Marathon, Micale, Mantinea, Cheronaea, Plataea. The
Romans record their battle at Cannas, and Pharsalian fields,
but they do but record, and we scarce hear of them. And yet
this supposed honour, popular applause, desired of
immortality by this means, pride and vain-glory spur them on
many times rashly and unadvisedly, to make away themselves
and multitudes of others. Alexander was sorry, because there
were no more worlds for him to conquer; he is admired by some
for it, animosa vox videtur, et regia, 'twas spoken like a
Prince; but as wise Seneca censures him, 'twas vox
iniquissima et stultissima, 'twas spoken like a Bedlam fool;
and that sentence which the same Seneca appropriates to his
father Philip and him, I apply to them all, Non minores fuere
pestes mortalium quam inundatio, quam conflagratio, quibus,
&c. they did as much mischief to mortal men as fire and
water, those merciless elements when they rage. Which is yet
more to be lamented, they persuade them this hellish course
of life is holy, they promise heaven to such as venture their
lives bello sacro, and that by these bloody wars, as
Persians, Greeks, and Romans of old, as modern Turks do now
their commons, to encourage them to fight, ut cadant
infeliciter. "If they die in the field, they go directly to
heaven, and shall be canonized for saints." (O diabolical
invention!) put in the Chronicles, in perpetuam rei memoriam,
to their eternal memory: when as in truth, as some hold, it
were much better (since wars are the scourge of God for sin,
by which he punisheth mortal men's peevishness and folly)
such brutish stories were suppressed, because ad morum
institutionem nihil habent, they conduce not at all to
manners, or good life. But they will have it thus
nevertheless, and so they put note of "divinity upon the most
cruel and pernicious plague of human kind," adore such men
with grand titles, degrees, statues, images, honour, applaud,
and highly reward them for their good service, no greater
glory than to die in the field. So Africanus is extolled by
Ennius: Mars, and Hercules, and I know not how many besides
of old, were deified; went this way to heaven, that were
indeed bloody butchers, wicked destroyers, and troublers of
the world, prodigious monsters, hell-hounds, feral plagues,
devourers, common executioners of human kind, as Lactantius
truly proves, and Cyprian to Donat, such as were desperate in
wars, and precipitately made away themselves, (like those
Celtes in Damascen, with ridiculous valour, ut dedecorosum
putarent muro ruenti se subducere, a disgrace to run away for
a rotten wall, now ready to fall on their heads,) such as
will not rush on a sword's point, or seek to shun a cannon's
shot, are base cowards, and no valiant men. By which means,
Madet orbis mutuo sanguine, the earth wallows in her own
blood, Saevit amor ferri scelerati insania belli; and for
that, which if it be done in private, a man shall be
rigorously executed, "and which is no less than murder
itself; if the same fact be done in public in wars, it is
called manhood, and the party is honoured for it." --
Prosperum et foelix scelus, virtue vocatur.

We measure all as Turks do, by the event, and most part, as
Cyprian notes, in all ages, countries, places, saevitiae
magnitudo impunitatem sceleris acquirit, the foulness of the
fact vindicates the offender. One is crowned for that for
which another is tormented: Ille crucem sceleris pretium
tulit, hic diadema; made a knight, a lord, an earl, a great
duke, (as Agrippa notes) for which another should have hung
in gibbets, as a terror to the rest,

-- "et tamen alter,
Si fecisset idem, caderet sub judice morum."

A poor sheep-stealer is hanged for stealing of victuals,
compelled peradventure by necessity of that intolerable cold,
hunger, and thirst, to save himself from starving: but a
great man in office may securely rob whole provinces, undo
thousands, pill and poll, oppress ad libitum, flea, grind,
tyrannise, enrich himself by spoils of the commons, be
uncontrollable in his actions, and after all, be recompensed
with turgent titles, honoured for his good service, and no
man dare find fault, or mutter at it.

How would our Democritus have been affected to see a wicked
caitiff, or "fool, a very idiot, a funge, a golden ass, a
monster of men, to have many good men, wise men, learned men
to attend upon him with all submission, as an appendix to his
riches, for that respect alone, because he hath more wealth
and money, and to honour him with divine titles, and bombast
epithets," to smother him with fumes and eulogies, whom they
know to be a dizzard, a fool, a covetous wretch, a beast,
&c., "because he is rich?" To see sub exuviis leonis onagrum,
a filthy loathsome carcase, a Gorgon's head puffed up by
parasites, assume this unto himself, glorious titles, in
worth an infant, a Cuman ass, a painted sepulchre, an
Egyptian temple? To see a withered face, a diseased,
deformed, cankered complexion, a rotten carcass, a viperous
mind, and Epicurean soul set out with orient pearls, jewels,
diadems, perfumes, curious elaborate works, as proud of his
clothes as a child of his new coats; and a goodly person, of
an angel-like divine countenance, a saint, an humble mind, a
meek spirit clothed in rags, beg, and now ready to be
starved? To see a silly contemptible sloven in apparel,
ragged in his coat, polite in speech, of a divine spirit,
wise? another neat in clothes, spruce, full of courtesy,
empty of grace, wit, talk nonsense?

To see so many lawyers, advocates, so many tribunals, so
little justice; so many magistrates, so little care of common
good; so many laws, yet never more disorders; Tribunal litium
segetem, the Tribunal a labyrinth, so many thousand suits in
one court sometimes, so violently followed? To see
injustissimum saepe juri praesidentem, impium religioni,
imperitissimum eruditioni, otiossissimum labori, monstrosum
humanitati? to see a lamb executed, a wolf pronounce
sentence, latro arraigned, and fur sit on the bench, the
judge severely punish others, and do worse himself, eundem
furtum facere et punire, rapinam plectere, quum sit ipse
captor? Laws altered, misconstrued, interpreted pro and con,
as the Judge is made by friend; bribed, or otherwise affected
as a nose of wax, good to-day, none to-morrow; or firm in his
opinion, cast in his? Sentence prolonged, changed, ad
arbitrium judicis, still the same case, "one thrust out of
his inheritance, another falsely put in by favour, false
forged deeds or wills." Incisae leges negliguntur, laws are
made and not kept; or if put in execution, they be some silly
ones that are punished. As put case it be fornication, the
father will disinherit or abdicate his child, quite cashier
him (out, villain, begone, come no more in my sight); a poor
man is miserably tormented with loss of his estate perhaps,
goods, fortunes, good name, for ever disgraced, forsaken, and
must do penance to the utmost; a mortal sin, and yet make the
worst of it, nunquid aliud fecit, saith Tranio in the poet,
nisi quodfaciunt summis nati generibus? he hath done no more
than what gentlemen usually do. Neque novum, neque mirum,
neque secus quam alii solent. For in a great person, right
worshipful Sir, a right honourable Grandy, 'tis not a venial
sin, no, not a peccadillo, 'tis no offence at all, a common
and ordinary thing, no man takes notice of it; he justifies
it in public, and peradventure brags of it,

"Nam quod turpe bonis, Titio, Seioque, decebat
Crispinum " --
For what would be base in good men, Titius, and Seius, became
Crispinus.

Many poor men, younger brothers, &c., by reason of bad policy
and idle education (for they are likely brought up in no
calling), are compelled to beg or steal, and then hanged for
theft; than which, what can be more ignominious, non minus
enim turpe principi multa supplicia, quam medico multa
funera, 'tis the governor's fault. Libentius verberant quam
docent, as schoolmasters do rather correct their pupils, than
teach them when they do amiss. "They had more need provide
there should be no more thieves and beggars, as they ought
with good policy, and take away the occasions, than let them
run on, as they do to their own destruction: root out
likewise those causes of wrangling, a multitude of lawyers,
and compose controversies, lites lustrales et seculares, by
some more compendious means." Whereas now for every toy and
trifle they go to law, mugit litibus insanum forum, et saevit
invicem discordantium rabies, they are ready to pull out one
another's throats; and for commodity "to squeeze blood,"
saith Hierom, "out of their brother's heart," defame, lie,
disgrace, backbite, rail, bear false witness, swear,
forswear, fight and wrangle, spend their goods, lives,
fortunes, friends, undo one another, to enrich an harpy
advocate, that preys upon them both, and cries Eia Socrates,
Eia Xantippe; or some corrupt Judge, that like the Kite in
Aesop, while the mouse and frog fought, carried both away.
Generally they prey one upon another as so many ravenous
birds, brute beasts, devouring fishes, no medium, omnes hic
aut captantur aut captant; aut cadavera qua lacerantur, aut
corvi qui lacerant, either deceive or be deceived; tear
others or be torn in pieces themselves; like so many buckets
in a well, as one riseth another falleth, one's empty,
another's full; his ruin is a ladder to the third; such are
our ordinary proceedings. What's the market? A place,
according to Anacharsis, wherein they cozen one another, a
trap; nay, what's the world itself? A vast chaos, a confusion
of manners, as fickle as the air, domicilium insanorum [a mad
house], a turbulent troop full of impurities, a mart of
walking spirits, goblins, the theatre of hypocrisy, a shop of
knavery, flattery, a nursery of villany, the scene of
babbling, the school of giddiness, the academy of vice; a
warfare, ubi velis nolis pugnandum, aut vincas aut succumbas,
in which kill or be killed; wherein every man is for himself,
his private ends, and stands upon his own guard. No charity,
love, friendship, fear of God, alliance, affinity,
consanguinity, christianity, can contain them, but if they be
any ways offended, or that string of commodity be touched,
they fall foul. Old friends become bitter enemies on a sudden
for toys and small offences, and they that erst were willing
to do all mutual offices of love and kindness, now revile and
persecute one another to death, with more than Vatinian
hatred, and will not be reconciled. So long as they are
behoveful, they love, or may bestead each other. but when
there is no more good to be expected, as they do by an old
dog, hang him up or cashier him: which Cato counts a great
indecorum, to use men like old shoes or broken glasses, which
are flung to the dunghill; he could not find in his heart to
sell an old ox, much less to turn away an old servant: but
they instead of recompense, revile him, and when they have
made him an instrument of their villiany, as Bajazet the
second Emperor of the Turks did by Acomethes Bassa, make him
away, or instead of reward, hate him to death, as Silius was
served by Tiberius. In a word every man for his own ends. Our
summum bonum is commodity, and the goddess we adore Dea
moneta, Queen money, to whom we daily offer sacrifice, which
steers our hearts, hands, affections, all: that most powerful
goddess, by whom we are reared, depressed, elevated, esteemed
the sole commandress of our actions, for which we pray, run,
ride, go, come, labour, and contend as fishes do for a crumb
that falleth into the water. It's not worth, virtue, (that's
bonum theatrale,) wisdom, valour, learning, honesty,
religion, or any sufficiency for which we are respected, but
money, greatness, office, honour, authority; honesty is
accounted folly; knavery, policy; men admired out of opinion,
not as they are, but as they seem to be: such shifting,
lying, cogging, plotting, counterplotting, temporizing,
flattering, cozening, dissembling, "that of necessity one
must highly offend God if he be conformable to the world,"
Cretizare cum Crete, "or else live in contempt, disgrace and
misery." One takes upon him temperance, holiness, another
austerity, a third an affected kind of simplicity, when as
indeed he, and he, and he, and the rest are "hypocrites,
ambidexters," out-sides, so many turning pictures, a lion on
the one side, a lamb on the other. How would Democritus have
been affected to see these things!

To see a man turn himself into all shapes like a camelion, or
as Proteus, omnia transformans sese in miracula rerum, to act
twenty parts and persons at once, for his advantage, to
temporize and vary like Mercury the Planet, good with good;
bad with bad; having a several face, garb, and character for
every one he meets; of all religions, humours, inclinations;
to fawn like a spaniel, mentitis et mimicis obsequiis, rage
like a lion, bark like a cur, fight like a dragon, sting like
a serpent, as meek as a lamb, and yet again grin like a
tiger, weep like a crocodile, insult over some, and yet
others domineer over him, here command, there crouch,
tyrannize in one place, be baffled in another, a wise man at
home, a fool abroad to make others merry.

To see so much difference betwixt words and deeds, so many
parasangs betwixt tongue and heart, men like stage-players
act variety of parts, give good precepts to others, soar
aloft, whilst they themselves grovel on the ground.

To see a man protest friendship, kiss his hand, quem mallet
truncatum videre, smile with an intent to do mischief, or
cozen him whom he salutes, magnify his friend unworthy with
hyperbolical eulogiums; his enemy albeit a good man, to
vilify and disgrace him, yea all his actions, with the utmost
that livor and malice can intent.

To see a servant able to buy out his master, him that carries
the mace more worth than the magistrate, which Plato, lib.
11, de leg., absolutely forbids, Epictetus abhors. A horse
that tills the land fed with chaff, an idle jade have
provender in abundance; him that makes shoes go barefoot
himself, him that sells meat almost pined; a toiling drudge
starve, a drone flourish.

To see men buy smoke for wares, castles built with fools'
heads, men like apes follow the fashions in tires, gestures,
actions: if the king laugh, all laugh;
"Rides? majore cachinno
Concutitur, flet si lachrymas conspexit amici."
(Juvenal: Do you laugh? He is shaken with much greater
laughter: he weeps also when he has beheld the tears of his
friend)
Alexander stooped, so did his courtiers; Alphonsus turned his
head, and so did his parasites. Sabina Poppea, Nero's wife,
wore amber-coloured hair, so did all the Roman ladies in an
instant, her fashion was theirs.

To see men wholly led by affection, admired and censured out
of opinion without judgment: an inconsiderate multitude, like
so many dogs in a village, if one bark all bark without a
cause: as fortune's fan turns, if a man be in favour, or
commanded by some great one, all the world applauds him; if
in disgrace, in an instant all hate him, and as at the sun
when he is eclipsed, that erst took no notice, now gaze and
stare upon him.

To see a man wear his brains in his belly, his guts in his
head, an hundred oaks on his back, to devour a hundred oxen
at a meal, nay more, to devour houses and towns, or as those
anthropophagi, to eat another.

To see a man roll himself up like a snowball, from base
beggary to right worshipful and right honourable titles,
unjustly to screw himself into honours and offices; another
to starve his genius, damn his soul to gather wealth, which
he shall not enjoy, which his prodigal son melts and consumes
in an instant.

To see the ?a??????a? [chachozelian] of our times, a man bend
all his forces, means, time, fortunes, to be a favourite's
favourite's favourite, &c., a parasite's parasite's parasite,
that may scorn the servile world as having enough already.

To see an hirsute beggar's brat, that lately fed on scraps,
crept and whined, crying to all, and for an old jerkin ran of
errands, now ruffle in silk and satin, bravely mounted,
jovial and polite, now scorn his old friends and familiars,
neglect his kindred, insult over his betters, domineer over
all.

To see a scholar crouch and creep to an illiterate peasant
for a meal's meat; a scrivener better paid for an obligation;
a falconer receive greater wages than a student; a lawyer get
more in a day than a philosopher in a year, better reward for
an hour, than a scholar for a twelvemonth's study; him that
can paint Thais, play on a fiddle, curl hair, &c, sooner get
preferment than a philologer or a poet.

To see a fond mother, like Aesop's ape, hug her child to
death, a witol wink at his wife's honesty, and too
perspicuous in all other affairs; one stumble at a straw, and
leap over a block; rob Peter, and pay Paul; scrape unjust
sums with one hand, purchase great manors by corruption,
fraud and cozenage, and liberally to distribute to the poor
with the other, give a remnant to pious uses, &c. Penny wise,
pound foolish; blind men judge of colours; wise men silent,
fools talk; find fault with others, and do worse themselves;
denounce that in public which he doth in secret; and which
Aurelius Victor gives out of Augustus, severely censure that
in a third, of which he is most guilty himself.

To see a poor fellow, or an hired servant venture his life
for his new master that will scarce give him his wages at
year's end; A country colone toil and moil, till and drudge
for a prodigal idle drone, that devours all the gain, or
lasciviously consumes with phantastical expences; A noble man
in a bravado to encounter death. and for a small flash of
honor to cast away himself; A worldling tremble at an
executor, and yet not fear hell-fire; To wish and hope for
immortality, desire to be happy, and yet by all means avoid
death, a necessary passage to bring him to it.

To see a fool-hardy fellow like those old Danes, qui
decollari malunt quam verberari, die rather than be punished,
in a sottish humour embrace death with alacrity, yet scorn to
lament his own sins and miseries, or his dearest friends'
departures.

To see wise men degraded, fools preferred, one govern towns
and cities, and yet a silly woman overrides him at home;
Command a province, and yet his own servants or children
prescribe laws to him, as Themistocles' son did in Greece;
"What I will (said he) my mother will, and what my mother
will, my father doth." To see horses ride in a coach, men
draw it; dogs devour their masters; towers build masons;
children rule; old meu go to school; women wear the breeches;
sheep demolish towns, devour men, &c. And in a word, the
world turned upside downward. O viveret Democritus!

To insist in every particular were one of Hercules' labours,
there's so many ridiculous instances, as motes in the sun.
Quantum est in rebus inane! (How much vanity there is in
things!) And who can speak of all? Crimine ab uno disce
omnes, take this for a taste.

But these are obvious to sense, trivial and well known, easy
to be discerned. How would Democritus have been moved, had he
seen the secrets of their hearts? If every man had a window
in his breast, which Momus would have had in Vulcan's man, or
that which Tully so much wished it were written in every
man's forehead, Quid quisque de republica sentiret, what he
thought; or that it could be effected in an instant, which
Mercury did by Charon in Lucian, by touching of his eyes, to
make him discern semel et simul rumores et sussuros.
Spes hominum caecas, morbos, votumque labores,
Et passim toto volitantes aethere curas."
"Blind hopes and wishes, their thoughts and affairs,
Whispers and rumours, and those flying cares."

That he could cubiculorum obductus foras recludere et secreta
cordium penetrare, which Cyprian desired, open doors and
locks, shoot bolts, as Lucian's Gallus did with a feather of
his tail: or Gyges' invisible ring, or some rare perspective
glass, or Otacousticon, which would so multiply species, that
a man might hear and see all at once (as Martianus Capella's
Jupiter did in a spear which he held in his hand, which did
present unto him all that was daily done upon the face of the
earth), observe cuckolds' horns, forgeries of alchemists, the
philosopher's stone, new projectors, &c., and all those works
of darkness, foolish vows, hopes, fears and wishes, what a
deal of laughter would it have afforded? He should have seen
windmills in one man's head, an hornet's nest in another. Or
had he been present with Icaromenippus in Lucian at Jupiter's
whispering place, and heard one pray for rain, another for
fair weather; one for his wife's, another for his father's
death, &c.; "to ask that at God's hand which they are abashed
any man should hear:" How would he have been confounded?
Would he, think you, or any man else, say that these men were
well in their wits? Haec sani esse hominis quis sanus juret
Orestes? Can all the hellebore in the Anticurae cure these
men? No sure, "an acre of hellebore will not do it."

That which is more to be lamented, they are mad like Seneca's
blind woman, and will not acknowledge, or seek for any cure
of it, for pauci vident morbum suum, omnes amant. If our leg
or arm offend us, we covet by all means possible to redress
it; and if we labour of a bodily disease, we send for a
physician; but for the diseases of the mind we take no notice
of them: Lust harrows us on the one side; envy, anger,
ambition on the other. We are torn in pieces by our passions,
as so many wild horses, one in disposition, another in habit;
one is melancholy, another mad; and which of us all seeks for
help, doth acknowledge his error, or knows he is sick? As
that stupid fellow put out the candle because the biting
fleas should not find him; he shrouds himself in an unknown
habit, borrowed titles, because nobody should discern him.
Every man thinks with himself, Egomet videor mihi sanus, I am
well, I am wise, and laughs at others. And 'tis a general
fault amongst them all, that which our forefathers have
approved, diet, apparel, opinions, humours, customs, manners,
we deride and reject in our time as absurd. Old men account
juniors all fools, when they are mere dizzards; and as to
sailors, -- terraeque urbesque recedunt -- they move, the
land stands still, the world hath much more wit, they dote
themselves. Turks deride us, we them; Italians, Frenchmen,
accounting them light headed fellows; the French scoff again
at Italians, and at their several customs; Greeks have
condemned all the world but themselves of barbarism, the
world as much vilifies them now; we account Germans heavy,
dull fellows, explode many of their fashions; they as
contemptibly think of us; Spaniards laugh at all, and all
again at them. So are we fools and ridiculous, absurd in our
actions, carriage; diet, apparel, customs, and consultations;
we scoff and point one at another, when as in conclusion all
are fools, "and they the veriest asses that hide their ears
most." A private man if he be resolved with himself, or set
on an opinion, accounts all idiots and asses that are not
affected as he is, -- nil rectum, nisi quod placuit sibi,
ducit, that are not so minded, (quodque volunt homines se
bene velle putant,) all fools that think not as he doth: he
will not say with Atticus, Suam quisque sponsam, mihi meam,
let every man enjoy his own spouse; but his alone is fair,
suus amor, &c., and scorns all in respect of himself, will
imitate none, hear none but himself as Pliny said, a law and
example to himself. And that which Hippocrates, in his
epistle to Dionysius, reprehended of old, is verified in our
times, Quisque in alio superfluum esse censet, ipse quod non
habet nec curat, that which he hath not himself; or doth not
esteem he accounts superfluity, an idle quality, a mere
foppery in another: like Aesop's fox, when he had lost his
tail, would have all his fellow foxes cut off theirs. The
Chinese say, that we Europeans have one eye, they themselves
two, all the world else is blind: (though Scaliger accounts
them brutes too, merum pecus,) so thou and thy sectaries are
only wise, others indifferent, the rest beside themselves,
mere idiots and asses. Thus not acknowledging our own errors
and imperfections, we securely deride others, as if we alone
were free, and spectators of the rest, accounting it an
excellent thing, as indeed it is, Aliena optimum frui
insania, to make ourselves merry with other men's
obliquities, when as he himself is more faulty than the rest,
mutato nomine, de te fabula narratur, he may take himself by
the nose for a fool; and which one calls maximum stultitiae
specimen, to be ridiculous to others, and not to perceive or
take notice of it, as Marsyas was when he contended with
Apollo, non intelligens se deridiculo haberi, saith Apuleius;
'tis his own cause, he is a convicted madman, as Austin well
infers "in the eyes of wise men and angels he seems like one,
that to our thinking walks with his heels upwards." So thou
laughest at me, and I at thee, both at a third; and he
returns that of the poet upon us again, Hei mihi, insanire me
aiunt, quum ipsi ultro insaniant. We accuse others of
madness, of folly, and are the veriest dizzards ourselves.
For it is a great sign and property of a fool (which Eccl. x.
3, points at) out of pride and self-conceit to insult,
vilify, condemn, censure, and call other men fools (Non
videmus manticae quod a tergo est) to tax that in others of
which we are most faulty; teach that which we follow not
ourselves: For an inconstant man to write of constancy; a
profane liver prescribe rules of sanctity and piety; a
dizzard himself make a treatise of wisdom; or with Sallust to
rail downright at spoilers  of countries, and yet in office
to be a most grievous poler himself. This argues weakness,
and is an evident sign of such parties' indiscretion. Peccat
uter nostrum cruce dignius? "Who is the fool now?" Or else
peradventure in some places we are all mad for company, and
so 'tis not seen, Satietas erroris et dementia, pariter
absurditatem st admirationem tollit. 'Tis with us, as it was
of old (in Tully's censure at least) with C. Pimbria in Rome,
a bold, hair-brain, mad fellow, and so esteemed of all, such
only excepted, that were as mad as himself: now in such a
case there is no notice taken of it.

"Nimirum insanus paucus videatur; eo quod
Maxima pars hominum morbo jactatur eodem."
"When all are mad, where all are like opprest
Who can discern one mad man from the rest?"


But put case they do perceive it, and some one be manifestly
convicted of madness, he now takes notice of his folly, be it
in action, gesture, speech, a vain humour he hath in
building, bragging, jangling, spending, gaming, courting,
scribbling, prating, for which he is ridiculous to others, on
which he dotes, he doth acknowledge as much: yet with all the
rhetoric thou hast, thou canst not so recall him, but to the
contrary notwithstanding, he will persevere in his dotage.
'Tis amabilis insania, et mentis gratissimus error, so
pleasing, so delicious, that he cannot leave it. He knows his
error, but will not seek to decline it, tell him what the
event will be, beggary, sorrow, sickness, disgrace, shame,
loss, madness, yet "an angry man will prefer vengeance, a
lascivious his whore, a thief his booty, a glutton his belly,
before his welfare." Tell an epicure, a covetous man, an
ambitious man, of his irregular course, wean him from it a
little, pol me occidistis amici, he cries anon, you have
undone him, and as the "dog to his vomit," he returns to it
again; no persuasion will take place, no counsel, say what
thou canst,

"Clames licet et mare coelo
 --- Confundas, surdo narras,"
(Although you call out, and confound the sea and sky, you
still address a deaf man)

demonstrate as Ulysses did to Elpenor and Gryllus, and the
rest of his companions, "those swinish men," he is
irrefragable in his humour, he will be a hog still; bray him
in a mortar, he will be the same. If he be in an heresy, or
some perverse opinion, settled as some of our ignorant
Papists are, convince his understanding, show him the several
follies and absurd fopperies of that sect, force him to say,
veris vincor, make it as clear as the sun, he will err still,
peevish and obstinate as he is; and as he said si in hoc
erro, libenter erro, nec hunc errorem auferri mihi volo; I
will do as I have done, as my predecessors have done, and as
my friends now do: I will dote for company. Say now, are
these men mad or no, Heus age responde? are they ridiculous?
cedo quemvis arbitrum, are they sanae mentis, sober, wise,
and discreet? have they common sense? -- uter est insanior
horum? (Hor. 2 ser. Which of these is the more mad?) I am of
Democritus' opinion for my part, I hold them worthy to be
laughed at; a company of brain-sick dizzards, as mad as
Orestes and Athamas, that they may go "ride the ass," and all
sail along to the Anticyrae, in the "ship of fools" for
company togther. I need not much labour to prove this which I
say otherwise than thus, make any solemn protestation, or
swear, I think you will believe me without an oath; say at a
word, are they fools? I refer it to you, though you be
likewise fools and madmen yourselves, and I as mad to ask the
question; for what said our comical Mercury?
"Justum ab injustis petere insipientis est.
I'll stand to your censure yet, what think you?"

But forasmuch as I undertook at first, that kingdoms,
provinces, families, were melancholy as well as private men,
I will examine them in particular, and that which I have
hitherto dilated at random, in more general terms, I will
particularly insist in, prove with more special and evident
arguments, testimonies, illustrations, and that in brief.
Nunc accipe quare desipiant omnes aeque ac tu. My first
argument is borrowed from Solomon, an arrow drawn out of his
sententious quiver, Pro. iii. 7, "Be not wise in thine own
eyes." And xxvi. 12, "Seest thou a man wise in his own
conceit? more hope is of a fool than of him." Isaiah
pronounceth a woe against such men, chap. v. 21, "that are
wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight." For
hence we may gather, that it is a great offence, and men are
much deceived that think too well of themselves, an especial
argument to convince them of folly. Many men (saith Seneca)
"had been without question wise, had they not had an opinion
that they had attained to perfection of knowledge already,
even before they had gone half way," too forward, too ripe,
praeproperi, too quick and ready, cito prudentes, cito pii,
cito mariti, cito patres, cito sacerdotes, cito omnes offici
capaces et curiosi, they had too good a conceit of
themselves, and that marred all; of their worth, valour,
skill, art, learning, judgment, eloquence, their good parts;
all their geese are swans, and that manifestly proves them to
be no better than fools. In former times they had but seven
wise men, now you can scarce find so many fools. Thales sent
the golden Tripos, which the fishermen found, and the oracle
commanded to be "given to the wisest, to Bias, Bias to
Solon," &c. If such a thing were now found, we should all
fight for it, as the three goddesses did for the golden
apple, we are so wise: we have women politicians, children
metaphysicians; every silly fellow can square a circle, make
perpetual motions, find the philosopher's stone, interpret
Apocalypses, make new Theories, a new system of the world,
new logic, new Philosophy, &c. Nostra utique regio, saith
Petronius, "our country is so full of deified spirits, divine
souls, that you may sooner find a god than a man amongst us,"
we think so well of ourselves, and that is an ample testimony
of much folly.

My second argument is grounded upon the like place of
Scripture, which though before mentioned in effect, yet for
some reasons is to be repeated (and by Plato's good leave, I
may do it, d?? t? ?a??? ???e? ??de? ß?apte?  [dis to chalon
rethen oyden  blaptei]. "Fools (saith David) by reason of
their transgressions," &c. Psal. cvii. 17. Hence Musculus
infers all transgressors must needs be fools. So we read Rom.
ii. "Tribulation and anguish on the soul of every man that
doeth evil;" but all do evil. And Isaiah, lxv. 14, "My
servants shall sing for joy, and ye shall cry for sorrow of
heart, and vexation of mind." 'Tis ratified by the common
consent of all philosophers. "Dishonesty (saith Cardan) is
nothing else but folly and madness." Probus quis nobiscum
vivit? Shew me an honest man, Nemo malus qui non stultus,"
'tis Fabius' aphorism to the same end. If none honest, none
wise, then all fools. And well may they be so accounted: for
who will account him otherwise, Qui iter adornat in
occidentem, quum properaret in orientem? that goes backward
all his life, westward, when he is bound to the east? or hold
him a wise man (saith Musculus) "that prefers momentary
pleasures to eternity, that spends his master's goods in his
absence, forthwith to be condemned for it?" Nequiquam sapit
qui sibi non sapit, who will say that a sick man is wise,
that eats and drinks to overthrow the temperature of his
body? Can you account him wise or discreet that would
willingly have his health, and yet will do nothing that
should procure or continue it? Theodoret, out of Plotinus the
Platonist, "holds it a ridiculous thing for a man to live
after his own laws, to do that which is offensive to God,,
and yet to hope that he should save him: and when he
voluntarily neglects his own safety, and contemns the means,
to think to be delivered by another:" who will say these men
are wise?

A third argument may be derived from the precedent, all men
are carried away with passion, discontent, lust, pleasures,
&c.; they generally hate those virtues they should love, and
love such vices they should hate. Therefore more than
melancholy, quite mad, brute beasts, and void of reason, so
Chrysostom contends; "or rather dead and buried alive," as
Philo Judeus concludes it for a certainty, "of all such that
are carried away with passions, or labour of any disease of
the mind." "Where is fear and sorrow," there Lactantius
stiffly maintains, "wisdom cannot dwell

-- qui cupiet, metuet quoque porro,
Qui metuens vivit, liber mihi non erit unquam'"
(He who is desirous, is also fearful, and he who lives in
fear can never be free.)

Seneca and the rest of the stoics are of opinion, that where
is any the least perturbation, wisdom may not be found. "What
more ridiculous," as Lactantius urges, "than to hear how
Xerxes whipped the Hellespont," threatened the Mountain
Athos, and the like? To speak ad rem, who is free from
passion? Mortalis nemo est quem non attingat dolor, morbusve,
as Tully determines out of an old poem, no mortal men can
avoid sorrow and sickness, and sorrow is an inseparable
companion from melancholy. Chrysostom pleads farther yet,
that they are more than mad, very beasts, stupified, and void
of common sense: "For how (saith he) shall I know thee to be
a man, when thou kickest like an ass, neighest like a horse
after women, ravest in lust like a bull, ravenest like a
bear, stingest like a scorpion, rakest like a wolf, as subtle
as a fox, as impudent as a dog? Shall I say thou art a man,
that hast all the symptoms of a beast? how shall I know thee
to be a man? by thy shape? That affrights me more, when I see
a beast in likeness of a man."

Seneca calls that of Epicurus, magnificam vocem, an heroical
speech, "A fool still begins to live," and accounts it a
filthy lightness in men, every day to lay new foundations of
their life, but who doth otherwise? One travels, another
builds; one for this, another for that business, and old
folks are as far out as the rest; O dementem senectutem,
Tully exclaims. Therefore young, old, middle age, all are
stupid, and dote.

Aeneas Sylvius, amongst many other, sets down three special
ways to find a fool by. He is a fool that seeks that he
cannot find: he is a fool that seeks that, which being found
will do him more harm than good: he is a fool, that having
variety of ways to bring him to his journey's end, takes that
which is worst. If so, methinks most men are fools; examine
their courses, and you shall soon perceive what dizzards and
mad men the major part are.

Beroaldus will have drunkards, afternoon men, and such as
more than ordinarily delight in drink, to be mad. The first
pot quencheth thirst, so Panyasis the poet determines in
Atheneaus, secunda gratiis, horis et Dyonisio: the second
makes merry, the third for pleasure, quarta ad insaniam, the
fourth makes them mad. If this position be true, what a
catalogue of mad men shall we have? what shall they be that
drink four times four? Nonne supra omnem furorem, supra omnem
insaniam reddunt insanissimos? I am of his opinion, they are
more than mad! much worse than mad.

The Abderites condemned Democritus for a mad man, because he
was sometimes sad, and sometimes again profusely merry. Hac
Patria (saith Hippocrates) ob risum furere et insanire
dicunt, his countrymen hold him mad because he laughs; and
therefore "he desires him to advise all his friends at
Rhodes, that they do not laugh too much, or be over sad." Had
those Abderites been conversant with us, and but seen what
fleering and grinning there is in this age, they would
certainly have concluded, we had been all out of our wits.

Aristotle in his ethics holds foelix idemque sapiens, to be
wise and happy, are reciprocal terms, bonus idemque sapiens
honestus. 'Tis Tully's paradox, "wise men are free, but fools
are slaves," liberty is a power to live according to his own
laws, as we will ourselves: who hath this liberty? who is
free?

-- "sapiens sibique imperiosus,
Quem neque pauperis, neque mors, neque vincula terrent,
Responsare cupidinibus, contemnere honores
Fortis, et in seipso totus teres atque rotandus."
He is wise that can command his own will,
Valiant and constant to himself still,
Whom poverty nor death, nor bands can fright,
Checks his desires, scorns honours, just and right."

But where shall such a man be found? if no where, then e
diametro, we are all slaves, senseless, or worse. Nemo malus
foelix. But no man is happy in this life, none good,
therefore no man wise. Rari quippe boni -- For one virtue you
shall find ten vices in the same party; pauci Promethei,
multi Epimethei. We may peradventure usurp the name, or
attribute it to others for favour, as Carolus Sapiens,
Philippus Bonus, Lodovicus Pius, &c., and describe the
properties of a wise man, as Tully doth an orator, Xenophon
Cyrus, Castilo a courtier, Galen temperament, an aristocracy
is described by politicians. But where shall such a man be
found?

"Vir bonus et sapiens, qualem vix repperit unum
Millibus e multis hominum consultus Apollo."
"A wise, a good man in a million,
Apollo consulted could scarce find one."

A man is a miracle of himself, but Trismegistus adds, Maximum
miraculum homo sapiens, a wise man is a wonder: multi
Thirsigeri, pauci Bacchi.

Alexander when he was presented with that rich and costly
casket of king Darius, and every man advised him what to put
in it, he reserved it to keep Homer's works, as the most
precious jewel of human wit, and yet Scaliger upbraids
Homer's muse, Nutricem insanae sapientiae, a nursery of
madness, impudent as a court lady, that blushes at nothing.
Jacobus Mycillus, Gilbertus Cognatus, Erasmus, and almost all
posterity admire Lucian's luxuriant wit, yet Scaliger rejects
him in his censure, and calls him the Cerberus of the muses.
Socrates, whom all the world so much magnified, is by
Lactantius and Theodoret condemned for a fool. Plutarch
extols Seneca's wit beyond all the Greeks, nulli secundus,
yet saith of himself "when I would solace myself with a fool,
I reflect upon myself and there I have him." Cardan, in his
Sixteenth Book of Subtilties, reckons up twelve super-
eminent, acute philosophers, for worth, subtlety, and wisdom:
Archimedes, Galen, Vitruvius, Architas Tarentinus, Euclid,
Geber, that first inventor of Algebra, Alkindus the
Mathematician, both Arabians, with others. But his triumviri
terrarum far beyond the rest, are Ptolomaeus, Plotinus,
Hippocrates. Scaliger exercitat. 224, scoffs at this censure
of his, calls some of them carpenters and mechanicians, he
makes Galen fimbriam Hippocratis, a skirt of Hippocrates: and
the said Cardan himself elsewhere condemns both Galen and
Hippocrates for tediousness, obscurity, confusion. Paracelsus
will have them both mere idiots, infants in physic and
philosophy. Scaliger and Cardan admire Suisset the
Calculator, qui pene modum excessit humani ingenii, and yet
Lod. Vives calls them nugas Suisseticas: and Cardan, opposite
to himself in another place, contemns those ancients in
respect of times present, Majoresque nostros ad presentes
collatos juste pueros appellari. In conclusion, the said
Cardan and Saint Bernard will admit none into this catalogue
of wise men, but only prophets and apostles; how they esteem
themselves, you have heard before. We are worldly-wise,
admire ourselves, and seek for applause: but hear Saint
Bernard, quanto magis foras es sapiens, tanto magis intus
stultus efficeris, &c. in omnius es prudens, circa teipsum
insipiens: the more wise thou art to others, the more fool to
thyself. I may not deny but that there is some folly
approved, a divine fury, a holy madness, even a spiritual
drunkenness in the saints of God themselves; sanctam insaniam
Bernard calls it (though not as blaspheming Vorstius, would
infer it as a passion incident to God himself, but), familiar
to good men, as that of Paul, 2 Cor. "he was a fool," &c. and
Rom. ix. he wisheth himself to be anathematized for them.
Such is that drunkenness which Ficinus speaks of; when the
soul is elevated and ravished with a divine taste of that
heavenly nectar, which poets deciphered by the sacrifice of
Dionysius, and in this sense with the poet, insanire lubet,
as Austin exhorts us, ad ebrietatem se quisque paret, let's
all be mad and drunk. But we commonly mistake, and go beyond
our commission, we reel to the opposite part, we are not
capable of it, and as he said of the Greeks, Vos Graeci
semper pueri, vos Britanni, Galli, Germani, Itali &c., you
are a company of fools.

Proceed now a partibus ad totum, or from the whole to parts,
and you shall find no other issue, the parts shall be
sufficiently dilated in this following Preface. The whole
must needs follow by a sorites or induction. Every multitude
is mad, bellua multorum capitum, (a many-headed beast,)
precipitate and rash without judgment, stultum animal, a
roaring rout. Roger Bacon proves it out of Aristotle, Vulgus
dividi in oppositum contra sapientes, quod vulgo videtur
verum, falsum est; that which the commonalty accounts true,
is most part false, they are still opposite to wise men, but
all the world is of this humour (vulgus), and thou thyself
art de vulgo, one of the commonalty; and he, and he, and so
are all the rest; and therefore, as Phocion concludes, to be
approved in nought you say or do, mere idiots and asses.
Begin then where you will, go backward or forward, choose out
of the whole pack, wink and choose, you shall find them all
alike, "never a barrel better herring."

Copernicus, Atlas his successor, is of opinion, the earth is
a planet, moves and shines to others, as the moon doth to us.
Digges, Gilbert, Keplerus, Origanus, and others, defend this
hypothesis of his in sober sadness, and that the moon is
inhabited; if it be so that the earth is a moon, then are we
also giddy, vertiginous and lunatic within this sublunary
maze.

I could produce such arguments till dark night: if you should
hear the rest,

"Ante diem clauso component vesper Olympo:"
"Through such a train of words if I should run,
The day would sooner than the tale be done:"

but according to my promise, I will descend to particulars.
This melancholy extends itself not to men only, but even to
vegetals and sensibles. I speak not of those creatures which
are saturnine, melancholy by nature, as lead, and such like
minerals, or those plants, rue, cypress, &c. and hellebore
itself; of which Agrippa treats, fishes, bird, and beasts,
hares, conies, dormice, &c., owls, bats, nightbirds, but that
artificial, which is perceived in them all. Remove a plant,
it will pine away, which is especially perceived in date
trees, as you may read at large in Constantine's husbandry,
that antipathy betwixt the vine and the cabbage, vine and
oil. Put a bird in a cage, he will die for sullenness, or a
beast in a pen, or take his young ones or companions from
him, and see what effect it will cause. But who perceives not
these common passions of sensible creatures, fear, sorrow,
&c. Of all other, dogs are most subject to this malady,
insomuch some hold they dream as men do, and through violence
of melancholy run mad; I could relate many stories of dogs
that have died for grief; and pined away for loss of their
masters, but they are common in every author.

Kingdoms, provinces, and politic bodies are likewise sensible
and subject to this disease, as Boterus in his politics hath
proved at large. "As in human bodies (saith he) there be
divers alterations proceeding from humours, so there be many
diseases in a commonwealth, which do as diversely happen from
several distempers," as you may easily perceive by their
particular symptoms. For where you shall see the people
civil, obedient to God and princes, judicious, peaceable and
quiet, rich, fortunate, and flourish, to live in peace, in
unity and concord, a country well tilled, many fair built and
populous cities, ubi incolae nitent, as old Cato said, the
people are neat, polite and terse, ubi bene, beateque vivunt,
which our politicians make the chief end of a commonwealth;
and which Aristotle Polit. lib. 3, cap. 4, calls Commune
bonum, Polybius lib. 6, optabilem et selectum statum, that
country is free from melancholy; as it was in Italy in the
time of Augustus, now in China, now in many other flourishing
kingdoms of Europe. But whereas you shall see many
discontents, common grievances, complaints, poverty,
barbarism, beggary, plagues, wars, rebellions, seditions,
mutinies, contentions, idleness, riot, epicurism, the land
lie untilled, waste, full of bogs, fens, deserts, &c., cities
decayed, base and poor towns, villages depopulated, the
people squalid, ugly, uncivil; that kingdom, that country,
must needs be discontent, melancholy, hath a sick body, and
had need to be reformed.

Now that cannot well be effected, till the causes of these
maladies be first removed, which commonly proceed from their
own default, or some accidental inconvenience: as to be
situated in a bad clime, too far north, sterile, in a barren
place, as the desert of Lybia, deserts of Arabia, places void
of waters, as those of Lop and Belgian in Asia, or in a bad
air, as at Alexandretta, Bantam, Pisa, Durazzo, S. John de
Ulloa, &c., or in danger of the sea's continual inundations,
as in many places of the Low Countries and elsewhere, or near
some bad neighbours, as Hungarians to Turks, Podolians to
Tartars, or almost any bordering countries, they live in fear
still and by reason of hostile incursions are oftentimes left
desolate. So are cities, by reason of wars, fires, plagues,
inundations, wild beasts, decay of trades, barred havens, the
sea's violence, as Antwerp may witness of late. Syracuse of
old, Brundisium in Italy, Rye and Dover with us, and many
that at this day suspect the sea's fury and rage, and labour
against it as the Venetians to their inestimable charge. But
the most frequent maladies are such as proceed from
themselves, as first when religion and God's service is
neglected, innovated or altered, where they do not fear God,
obey their prince, where atheism, epicurism, sacrilege,
simony, &c., and all such impieties are freely committed,
that country cannot prosper. When Abraham came to Gerar, and
saw a bad land, he said, sure the fear of God was not in that
place. Cyprian Echovius, a Spanish chorographer, above all 
other cities of Spain, commends "Borcino, in which there was
no beggar, no man poor, &c., but all rich, and in good
estate, and he gives the reason, because they were more
religious than their neighbours:" why was Israel often
spoiled by their enemies, led into captivity, &c., but for
their idolatry, neglect of God's word, for sacrilege, even
for one Achan's fault? And what shall we expect that have
such multitudes of Achans, church robbers, simoniacal
patrons, &c., how can they hope to flourish, that neglect
divine duties, that live most part like Epicures?

Other common grievances are generally noxious to a body
politic; alteration of laws and customs, breaking privileges,
general oppressions, seditions, &c., observed by Aristotle,
Bodin, Boterus, Junius, Arniscus, &c. I will only point at
some of the chiefest. Impotentia gubernandi, ataxia,
confusion, ill-government, which proceeds from unskilful,
slothful, griping, covetous, unjust, rash, or tyrannizing
magistrates, when they are fools, idiots, children, proud,
wilful, partial, indiscreet, oppressors, giddy heads,
tyrants, not able or unfit to manage such offices: many noble
cities and flourishing kingdoms by that means are desolate,
the whole body groans under such heads, and all the members
must needs be disaffected, as at this day those goodly
provinces in Asia Minor, &c. groan under the burden of a
Turkish government; and those vast kingdoms of Muscovia,
Russia, under a tyrannizing duke. Who ever heard of more
civil and rich populous countries than those of Greece, Asia
Minor, abounding with all wealth, multitudes of inhabitants,
force, power, splendour and magnificence? and that miracle of
countries, the Holy Land, that in so small a compass of
ground could maintain so many towns, cities, produce so many
fighting men? Egypt another paradise, now barbarous and
desert, are almost waste, by the despotical government of an
imperious Turk, intolerabili servitutis jugo premitur (one
saith) not only fire and water, goods or lands, sed ipse
spiritus ab insolentissimi victoris pendet nutu, such is
their slavery, their lives and souls depend upon his insolent
will and command. A tyrant that spoils all wheresoever he
comes, insomuch that an historian complains, "if an old
inhabitant should now see them, he would not know them, if a
traveller or stranger, it would grieve his heart to behold
them." Whereas Aristotle notes, Novae exactiones, nova onera
imposita, new burdens and exactions daily come upon them,
like those of which Zosimus, lib. 2, so grievous, ut viri
uxores, patres filios prostituerent ut exactoribus e questu,
&c., they must needs be discontent, hinc civitatum gemitus et
ploratus, as Tully holds, hence come those complaints and
tears of cities, poor, miserable, rebellious, and desperate
subjects, as Hippolitus adds; and as a judicious countryman
of ours observed not long since, in a survey of that great
Duchy of Tuscany, the people lived much grieved and
discontent, as appeared by their manifold and manifest
complainings in that kind. "That the state was like a sick
body which had lately taken physic, whose humours are not yet
well settled, and weakened so much by purging, that nothing
was left but melancholy."

 Whereas the princes and potentates are immoderate in lust,
hypocrites, epicures, of no religion, but in shew: Quid
hypocrisi fragilius? what so brittle and unsure? what sooner
subverts their estates than wandering and raging lusts, on
their subjects' wives, daughters? to say no worse. That they
should facem praeferre, lead the way to all virtuous actions,
are the ringleaders often times of all mischief and dissolute
courses, and by that means their countries are plagued, "and
they themselves often ruined, banished, or murdered by
conspiracy of their subjects, as Sardanapalus was, Dionysius,
junior, Heliogabalus, Periander, Pisistratus, Tarquinius,
Timocrates, Childericus, Appius Claudius, Andronicus,
Galeacius Sforsia, Alexander Medices," &c.

Whereas the princes or great men are malicious, envious,
factious, ambitious, emulators, they tear a commonwealth
asunder, as so many Guelfs and Gibelines disturb the
quietness of it, and with mutual murders let it bleed to
death; our histories are too full of such barbarous
inhumanities, and the miseries that issue from them.

Whereas they be like so many horse-leeches, hungry, griping,
corrupt, covetous, avaritiae mancipia, ravenous as wolves,
for as Tully writes: qui proeest prodest, et qui pecudibus
proeest, debet eorum utilitati inservire: or such as prefer
their private before the public good. For as he said long
since, res privatae publicis semper offficere. Or whereas
they be illiterate, ignorant, empirics in policy, ubi deest
facultas virtus (Aristot. pol. 5, cap. 8,) et scientia, wise
only by inheritance, and in authority by birth-right, favour,
or for their wealth and titles; there must needs be a fault,
a great defect: because as an old philosopher affirms, such
men are not always fit. "Of an infinite number, few noble are
senators, and of those few, fewer good, and of that small
number of honest, good, and noble men, few that are learned,
wise, discreet, and sufficient, able to discharge such
places, it must needs turn to the confusion of a state."

For as the Princes are, so are the people; Qualis Rex, talis
grex: and which Antigonus right well said of old, qui
Macedoniae regent erudit, omnea  etiam subditos erudit, he 
that teaches the king of Macedon, teaches all his subjects,
is a true saying still.

"For Princes are the glass, the school, the book,
Where subjects' eyes do lean, do read, do look."
--- "Velocius et citius nos
Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domestica, magnis
Cum subeant animos auctoribus." ---
(Vicious domestic examples operate more quickly on us when
suggested to our minds by high authorities)

Their examples are soonest followed, vices entertained, if
they be profane, irreligious, lascivious, riotous, epicures,
factious, covetous, ambitious, illiterate, so will the
commons most part be, idle, unthrifts, prone to lust,
drunkards, and therefore poor and needy (? pe??a stas??
eµp??e? ?a? ?a??????a? [e penia stasin empoiei chai
chachoyrgian] , for poverty begets sedition and villany) upon
all occasions ready to mutiny and rebel, discontent still,
complaining, murmuring, grudging, apt to all outrages,
thefts, treason; murders, innovations, in debt, shifters,
cozeners, outlaws, Profligatae famae ac vitae. It was an old
politician's aphorism, "They that are poor and bad envy rich,
hate good men, abhor the present government, wish for a new,
and would have all turned topsy turvy." When Catiline
rebelled in Rome, he got a company of such debauched rogues
together, they were his familiars and coadjutors, and such
have been your rebels most part in all ages, Jack Cade, Tom
Straw, Kette, and his companions.

Where they be generally riotous and contentious, where there
be many discords, many laws, many lawsuits, many lawyers and
many physicians, it is a manifest sign of a distempered,
melancholy state, as Plato long since maintained: for where
such kind of men swarm, they will make more work for
themselves, and that body politic diseased, which was
otherwise sound. A general mischief in these our times, an
insensible plague, and never so many of them: "which are now
multiplied (saith Mat. Geraldus, a lawyer himself,) as so
many locusts, not the parents, but the plagues of the
country, and for the most part a supercilious, bad, covetous,
litigious generation of men. Crumenimulga natio, &c. a purse-
milking nation, a clamorous company, gowned vultures, qui ex
injuria vivent a sanguine civium, thieves and seminaries of
discord; worse than any polers by the highway side, auri
accipitres, auri exterebronides, pecuniarum hamiolae,
quadruplatores, curice harpagones, fori tintinabula, monstra
hominum, mangones, &c., that take upon them to make peace,
but are indeed the very disturbers of our peace, a company of
irreligious harpies, scraping, griping catchpoles, (I mean
our common hungry pettifoggers, rabulas forenses, love and
honour in the meantime all good laws, and worthy lawyers,
that are so many oracles and pilots of a well-governed
commonwealth.) Without art, without judgment, that do more
harm, as Livy said, quam bella externa, fames, morbive, than
sickness, war; hunger, diseases; "and cause a most incredible
destruction of a commonwealth," saith Sesellius, a famous
civilian sometimes in Paris, as ivy doth by an oak, embrace
it so long, until it hath got the heart out of it, so do they
by such places they inhabit; no counsel at all, no justice,
no speech to be had, nisi eum premulseris, he must be fed
still, or else he is as mute as a fish, better open an oyster
without a knife. Experto crede (saith Salisburiensis) in
manus eorum millies incidi, et Charon immitis, qui nulli
pepercit unquam, his longe clementior est; "I speak out of
experience, I have been a thousand times amongst them, and
Charon himself is more gentle than they; he is contented with
his single pay, but they multiply still, they are never
satisfied," besides they have damnificas linguas, as he terms
it, nisi funibus argenteis vincias, they must be fed to say
nothing, and get more to hold their peace than we can to say
our best. They will speak their clients fair, and invite them
to their tables, but as he follows it, "of all injustice 
there is none so pernicious as that of theirs, which when
they deceive most, will seem to be honest men." They take
upon them to be peacemakers, et fovere causas humilium, to
help them to their right, patrocinantur afflictis, but all is
for their own good, ut loculos pleniorum exhauriant, they
plead for poor men gratis, but they are but as a stale to
catch others. If there be no jar, they can make a jar, out of
the law itself find still some quirk or other, to set them at
odds, and continue causes so long, lustra aliquot, I know not
how many years before the cause is heard, and when 'tis
judged and determined by reason of some tricks and errors, it
is as fresh to begin, after twice seven years some times, as
it was at first; and so they prolong time, delay suits till
they have enriched themselves, and beggared their clients.
And, as Cato inveighed against Isocrates' scholars, we may
justly tax our wrangling lawyers, they do consenescere in
litibus, are so litigious and busy here on earth, that I
think they will plead their client's causes hereafter, some
of them in hell. Simlerus complains amongst the Suissers of
the advocates in his time, that when they should make an end,
they began controversies, and "protract their causes many
years, persuading them their title is good, till their
patrimonies be consumed, and that they have spent more in
seeking than the thing is worth, or they shall get by the
recovery." So that he that goes to law, as the proverb is,
holds a wolf by the ears, or as a sheep in a storm runs for
shelter to a brier, if he prosecute his cause he is consumed,
if he surcease his suit he loseth all; what difference? They
had wont heretofore, saith Austin, to end matters, per
communes arbitros; and so in Switzerland (we are informed by
Simlerus), "they had some common arbitrators or daysmen in
every town, that made a friendly composition betwixt man and
man, and he much wonders at their honest simplicity, that
could keep peace so well, and end such great causes by that
means. At Fez in Africa, they have neither lawyers nor
advocates; but if there be any controversies amongst them,
both parties plaintiff and defendant come to their Alfakins
or chief judge, "and at once without any farther appeals or
pitiful delays, the cause is heard and ended." Our
forefathers, as a worthy chorographer of ours observes, had
wont pauculis cruculis aureis, with a few golden crosses, and
lines in verse, make all conveyances, assurances. And such
was the candour and integrity of succeeding ages, that a deed
(as I have often seen) to convey a whole manor, was implicite
contained in some twenty lines or thereabouts; like that
scede or Sytala Laconica, so much renowned of old in all
contracts, which Tully so earnestly commends to Atticus,
Plutarch in his Lysander, Aristotle polit.: Thucydides, lib.
1. Diodorus and Suidas approve and magnify, for that laconic
brevity in this kind; and well they might, for, according to
Tertullian, certa sunt paucis, there is much more certainty
in fewer words. And so was it of old throughout: but now many
skins of parchment will scarce serve turn; he that buys and
sells a house, must have a house full of writings, there be
so many circumstances, so many words, such tautological
repetitions of all particulars, (to avoid cavillation they
say;) but we find by our woful experience, that to subtle
wits it is a cause of much more contention and variance, and
scarce any conveyance so accurately penned by one, which
another will not find a crack in, or cavil at; if any one
word be misplaced, any little error, all is disannulled. That
which is a law to-day, is none to-morrow; that which is sound
in one man's opinion, is most faulty to another; that in
conclusion, here is nothing amongst us but contention and
confusion, we bandy one against another. And that which long
since Plutarch complained of them in Asia, may be verified in
our times. "These men here assembled, come not to sacrifice
to their gods, to offer Jupiter their first-fruits, or
merriments to Bacchus; but an yearly disease, exasperating
Asia, hath brought them hither, to make an end of their
controversies and lawsuits." 'Tis multitudo perdentium et
pereuntium, a destructive rout that seek one another's ruin.
Such most part are our ordinary suitors, termers, clients,
new stirs every day, mistakes, error; cavils, and at this
present, as I have heard in some one court, I know not how
many thousand causes: no person free, no title almost good,
with such bitterness in following, so many slights,
procrastinations, delays, forgery, such cost (for infinite
sums are inconsiderately spent), violence and malice, I know
not by whose fault, lawyers, clients, laws, both or all: but
as Paul reprehended the Corinthians long since, I may more
positively infer now: "There is a fault amongst you, and I
speak it to your shame, Is there not a wise man amongst you,
to judge between his brethren? but that a brother goes to law
with a brother." And Christ's counsel concerning lawsuits,
was never so fit to be inculcated as in this age: "Agree with
thine adversary quickly," &c. Matth. v. 25.

I could repeat many such particular grievances, which must
disturb a body politic. To shut up all in brief, where good
government is, prudent and wise princes, there all things
thrive and prosper, peace and happiness is in that land:
where it is otherwise, all things are ugly to behold, incult,
barbarous, uncivil, a paradise is turned to a wilderness.
This island amongst the rest, our next neighbours the French
and Germans, may be a sufficient witness, that in a short
time by that prudent policy of the Romans, was brought from
barbarism; see but what Caesar reports of us, and Tacitus of
those old Germans, they were once as uncivil as they in
Virginia, yet by planting of colonies and good laws, they
became from barbarous outlaws, to be full of rich and
populous cities, as now they are, and most flourishing
kingdoms. Even so might Virginia, and those wild Irish have
been civilized long since, if that order had been heretofore
taken, which now begins, of planting colonies, &c. I have
read a discourse, printed anno 1612. "Discovering the true
causes why Ireland was never entirely subdued, or brought
under obedience to the crown of England, until the beginning
of his Majesty's happy reign." Yet if his reasons were
thoroughly scanned by a judicious politician, I am afraid he
would not altogether be approved, but that it would turn to
the dishonour of our nation, to suffer it to lie so long
waste. Yea, and if some travellers should see (to come nearer
home) those rich, united provinces of Holland, Zealand &c.,
over against us; those neat cities and populous towns, full
of most industrious artificers, so much land recovered from
the sea, and so painfully preserved by those artificial
inventions, so wonderfully approved, as that of Bemster in
Holland, ut nihil huic par aut simile inveniat in toto orbe,
saith Bertius the geographer, all the world cannot match it,
many navigable channels from place to place, made by men's
hands, etc. and on the other side so many thousand acres of
our fens lie drowned, our cities thin, and those vile, poor,
and ugly to behold in respect of theirs, our trades decayed,
our still running rivers stopped, and that beneficial use of
transportation, wholly neglected, so many havens void of
ships and towns, so many parks and forests for pleasure,
barren heaths, so many villages depopulated, &c. I think sure
he would find some fault.

I may not deny but that this nation of ours, doth bene audire
apud exteros, is a most noble, a most flourishing kingdom, by
common consent of all geographers, historians, politicians,
'tis unica velut arx,(The citadel par excellence) and which
Quintius in Livy said of the inhabitants of Peloponnesus, may
be well applied to us, we are testudines testa sua inclusi,
like so many tortoises in our shells safely defended by an
angry sea, as a wall on all sides. Our island hath many such
honourable eulogiums; and as a learned countryman of ours
right well hath it, "Ever since the Normans first coming into
England, this country both for military matters, and all
other of civility, hath been paralleled with the most
flourishing kingdoms of Europe and our Christian world," a
blessed, a rich country, and one of the fortunate isles: and
for some things preferred before other countries, for expert
seamen, our laborious discoveries, art of navigation, true
merchants, they carry the bell away from all other nations,
even the Portugals and Hollanders themselves; "without all
fear," saith Boterus, "furrowing the ocean winter and summer,
and two of their captains, with no less valour than fortune,
have sailed round about the world? We have besides many
particular blessings, which our neighbours want, the Gospel
truly preached, church discipline established, long peace and
quietness free from exactions, foreign fears, invasions,
domestical seditions, well manured, fortified by art, and
nature, and now most happy in that fortunate union of England
and Scotland, which our forefathers have laboured to effect,
and desired to see. But in which we excel all others, a wise,
learned, religious king, another Numa, a second Augustus, a
true Josiah; most worthy senators, a learned clergy, an
obedient commonalty, &c. Yet amongst many roses, some
thistles grow, some bad weeds and enormities, which much
disturb the peace of this body politic, eclipse the honour
and glory of it, fit to be rooted out, and with all speed to
be reformed.

The first is idleness, by reason of which we have many swarms
of rogues, and beggars, thieves, drunkards, and discontented
persons (whom Lycurgus in Plutarch calls morbos reipublicae,
the boils of the commonwealth), many poor people in all our
towns. Civitates ignobiles as Polydore calls them, base built
cities, inglorious, poor, small, rare in sight, ruinous, and
thin of inhabitants. Our land is fertile we may not deny,
full of all good things, and why doth it not then abound with
cities, as well as Italy, France, Germany, the Low-countries?
because their policy hath been otherwise, and we are not so
thrifty, circumspect, industrious. Idleness is the malus
genius of our nation. For as Boterus justly argues, fertility
of a country is not enough, except art and industry be joined
unto it, according to Aristotle, riches are either natural or
artificial; natural, are good land, fair mines, &c.
artificial, are manufactures, coins, &c. Many kingdoms are
fertile, but thin of inhabitants, as that Duchy of Piedmont
in Italy, which Leander Albertus so much magnifies for corn,
wine, fruits, &c., yet nothing near so populous as those
which are more barren. "England," saith he, "London only
excepted, hath never a populous city, and yet a fruitful
country." I find 46 cities and walled towns in Alsatia, a
small province in Germany, 50 castles, an infinite number of
villages, no ground idle, no not rocky places, or tops of
hills are untilled, as Munster informeth us. In Greichgea, a
small territory on the Necker, 24 Italian miles over, I read
of 20 walled towns, innumerable villages, each one containing
150 houses most part, besides castles and noblemen's palaces.
I observe in Turinge, in Dutchland (twelve miles over by
their scale) 12 counties, and in them 144 cities, 2000
villages, 144 towns, 250 castles. In Bavaria, 34 cities, 46
towns, &c. Portugallia interamnis, a small plot of ground,
hath 1460 parishes, 130 monasteries, 200 bridges. Malta, a
barren island, yields 20,000 inhabitants. But of all the
rest, I admire Lues Guicciardine's relations of the Low-
countries. Holland hath 26 cities, 400 great villages.
Zeland, 10 cities, 102 parishes. Brabant, 26 cities, 102
parishes. Flanders, 28 cities, 90 towns, 1154 villages,
besides abbeys, castles, &c. The  Low-countries generally
have three cities at least for one of ours, and those far
more populous and rich: and what is the cause, but their
industry and excellency in all manner of trades? Their
commerce, which is maintained by a multitude of tradesmen, so
many excellent channels made by art and opportune havens, to
which they build their cities; all which we have in like
measure, at at least may have. But their chiefest loadstone
which draws all manner of commerce and merchandise, which
maintains their present estate, is not fertility of soil, but
industry that enricheth them, the gold mines of Peru, or Nova
Hispania may not compare with them. They have neither gold
nor silver of their own, wine nor oil, or scarce any corn
growing in those united provinces, little or no wood, tin,
lead, iron, silk, wool, any stuff almost, or metal; and yet
Hungary, Transylvania, that brag of their mines, fertile
England cannot compare with them. I dare boldly say, that
neither France, Tarentum, Apulia, Lombardy, or any part of
Italy, Valentia in Spain, or that pleasant Andalusia, with
their excellent fruits, wine and oil, two harvests, no not
any part of Europe is so flourishing, so rich, so populous,
so full of good ships, of well-built cities, so abounding
with all things necessary for the use of man. 'Tis our
Indies, an epitome of China, and all by reason of their
industry, good policy, and commerce. Industry is a loadstone
to draw all good things; that alone makes countries flourish,
cities populous, and will enforce by reason of much manure,
which necessarily follows, a barren soil to be fertile and
good, as sheep, saith Dion, mend a bad pasture.

Tell me, politicians, why is that fruitful Palestina, noble
Greece, Egypt, Asia Minor, so much decayed, and (mere
carcases now) fallen from that they were? The ground is the
same, but the government is altered, the people are grown
slothful, idle, their good husbandry, policy, and industry is
decayed. Non fatigata aut effoeta humus, as Columella well
informs Sylvinus, sed nostra fit inertia, &c. (the soil is
not tired or exhausted, but has become barren through our
sloth). May a man believe that which Aristotle in his
politics, Pausanias, Stephanus, Sophianus, Gerbelius relate
of old Greece? I find heretofore 70 cities in Epirus
overthrown by Paulus Aemilius, a goodly province in times
past, now left desolate of good towns and almost inhabitants.
62 cities in Macedonia in Strabo's time. I find 30 in
Laconia, but now scarce so many villages, saith Gerbelius. If
any man from Mount Taygetus should view the  country round
about, and see tot delicias, tot urbes per Peloponnesum
dispersas, so many delicate and brave built cities with such
cost and exquisite cunning,  so neatly set out in
Peloponnesus, he should perceive them now ruinous and
overthrown, burnt, waste, desolate, and laid level with the
ground. Incredibile dictu, &c. And as he laments, Quis talia
fando Temperet a lachrymis? Quis tam durus aut ferreus? (Not
even the hardest of our foes could hear / Nor stern Ulyssses
tell without a tear), so he prosecutes it. Who is he that can
sufficiently condole and commiserate these ruins? Where are
those 4000 cities of Egypt, those 100 cities in Crete? Are
they now come to two? What saith Pliny and Aelian of old
Italy? There were in former ages 1166 cities: Blondus and
Machiavel, both grant them now nothing near so populous, and
full of good towns as in the time of Augustus (for now
Leander Albertus can find but 300 at most), and if we may
give credit to Livy, not then so strong and puissant as of
old: "They mustered 70 Legions in former time; which now the
known world will scarce yield." Alexander built 70 cities in
a short space for his part, our Sultans and Turks demolish
twice as many, and leave all desolate. Many will not believe
but that our island of Great Britain is now more populous
than ever it was; yet let them read Bale, Leland and others,
they shall find it most flourished in the Saxon Heptarchy,
and in the Conqueror's time was far better inhabited than at
this present. See that Domesday Book, and show me those
thousands of parishes, which are now decayed, cities ruined,
villages depopulated, &c. The lesser the territory is,
commonly, the richer it is. Parvus sed bene cultus ager. [a
small but well cultivated field] As those Athenian,
Lacedaemonian, Arcadian, Aelian, Sycionian, Messenian, &c.,
commonwealths of Greece make ample proof; as those imperial
cities and free states of Germany may witness, those Cantons
of Switzers, Rheti, Grisons, Walloons, Territories of
Tuscany, Luke and Senes of old, Piedmont, Mantua, Venice in
Italy, Ragusa, &c.

That prince therefore, as Boterus adviseth, that will have a
rich country, and fair cities, let him get good trades,
privileges, painful inhabitants, artificers, and suffer no
rude matter unwrought, as tin, iron, wool, lead, &c., to be
transported out of his country, -- a thing in part seriously
attempted amongst us, but not effected. And because industry
of men, and multitude of trade so much avails to the ornament
and enriching of a kingdom; those ancient Massilians would
admit no man into their city that had not some trade. Selym
the first Turkish emperor procured a thousand good artificers
to be brought from Taurus to Constantinople. The Polanders
indented with Henry Duke of Anjou, their new chosen king, to
bring with him an hundred families of artificers into Poland.
James the First, in Scotland (as Buchanan writes), sent for
the best artificers he could get in Europe, and gave them
great rewards to teach his subjects their several trades.
Edward the Third, our most renowned king, to his eternal
memory, brought clothing first into this island, transporting
some families of artificers from Gaunt hither. How many
goodly cities could I reckon up, that thrive wholly by trade,
where thousands of inhabitants live singular well by their
fingers' ends! As Florence in Italy by making cloth of gold;
great Milan by silk, and all curious works; Arras in Artois
by those fair hangings; many cities in Spain, many in France,
Germany, have none other maintenance, especially those within
the land. Mecca in Arabia Petraea, stands in a most
unfruitful country, that wants water, amongst the rocks (as
Vertomanus describes it), and yet it is a most elegant and
pleasant city, by reason of the traffic of the east and west.
Ormus in Persia is a most famous mart-town, hath nought else
but the opportunity of the haven to make it flourish.
Corinth, a noble city (Lumen Graeciae, Tully calls it) the
Eye of Greece, by reason of Oenchreas and Lecheus those
excellent ports, drew all that traffic of the Ionian and
Aegean seas to it; and yet the country about it was curva et
superciliosa, as Strabo terms it, rugged and harsh. We may
say the same of Athens, Actium, Thebes, Sparta, and most of
those towns in Greece. Nuremberg in Germany is sited in a
most barren soil, yet a noble imperial city, by the sole
industry of artificers, and cunning trades, they draw the
riches of most countries to them, so expert in manufactures,
that as Sallust long since gave out of the like, Sedem animae
in extremis digitis habent, their soul, or intellectus agens,
was placed in their fingers' end; and so we may say of Basil,
Spire, Cambray, Frankfort, &c. It is almost incredible to
speak what some write of Mexico and the cities adjoining to
it, no place in the world at their first discovery more
populous, Mat. Riccius, the Jesuit, and some others, relate
of the industry of the Chinese most populous countries, not a
beggar or an idle person to be seen, and how by that means
they prosper and flourish. We bate the same means, able
bodies, pliant wits, matter of all sorts, wool, flax, iron,
tin, lead, wood, &c., many excellent subjects to work upon,
only industry is wanting. We send our best commodities beyond
the seas, which they make good use of to their necessities,
set themselves a work about, and severally improve, sending
the same to us back at dear rates, or else make toys and
baubles of the tails of them, which they sell to us again, at
as great a reckoning as the whole. In most of our cities,
some few excepted, like Spanish loiterers, we live wholly by
tippling-inns and ale-houses. Malting are their best ploughs,
their greatest traffic to sell ale. Meteran and some others
object to us, that we are no whit so industrious as the
Hollanders: "Manual trades (saith he) which are more curious
or troublesome, are wholly exercised by strangers: they dwell
in a sea full of fish, but they are so idle, they will not
catch so much as shall serve their own turns, but buy it of
their neighbours." Tush Mare liberum, they fish under our
noses, and sell it to us when they have done, at their own
prices.
--- "Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, et non potuisse refelli."

I am ashamed to hear this objected by strangers, and know not
how to answer it.

Amongst our towns, there is only London that bears the face
of a city, Epitome Britanniae, a famous emporium, second to
none beyond seas, a noble mart: but sola crescit,
decrescentibus aliis; and yet in my slender judgment,
defective in many things. The rest (some few excepted) are in
mean estate, ruinous most part, poor, and full of beggars, by
reason of their decayed trades, neglected or bad policy,
idleness of their inhabitants, riot, which had rather beg or
loiter, and be ready to starve, than work.

I cannot deny but that something may be said in defence of
our cities, that they are not so fair built, (for the sole
magnificence of this kingdom, concerning buildings, hath been
of old in those Norman castles and religious houses,) so
rich, thick sited, populous, as in some other countries;
besides the reasons Cardan gives, Subtil. Lib. 11. we want
wine and oil, their two harvests, we dwell in a colder air,
and for that cause must a little more liberally feed of
flesh, as all northern countries do: our provisions will not
therefore extend to the maintenance of so many; yet
notwithstanding we have matter of all sorts, an open sea for
traffic, as well as the rest, goodly havens. And how can we
excuse our negligence, our riot, drunkenness, &c., and such
enormities that follow it? We have excellent laws enacted,
you will say, severe statutes, houses of correction, &c., to
small purpose it seems; it is not houses will serve, but
cities of correction; our trades generally ought to be
reformed, wants supplied. In other countries they have the
same grievances, I confess, but that doth not excuse us,
wants, defects, enormities, idle drones, tumults, discords,
contention, law-suits, many laws made against them to repress
those innumerable brawls and law-suits, excess in apparel,
diet, decay of tillage, depopulations, especially against
rogues, beggars, Egyptian vagabonds (so termed at least)
which have swarmed all over Germany, France, Italy, Poland,
as you may read in Munster, Cranzius. and Aventinus; as those
Tartars and Arabians at this day do in the eastern countries:
yet such has been the iniquity of all ages, as it seems to
small purpose. Nemo in nostra civitate mendicus esto, (let
no-one in our city be a beggar) saith Plato: he will have
them purged from a commonwealth, "as a bad humour from the
body," that are like so many ulcers and boils, and must be
cured before the melancholy body can be eased.

What Carolus Magnus, the Chinese, the Spaniards, the Duke of
Saxony, and many other states have decreed in this case, read
Arniseus, cap. 19; Boterus, libro 8, cap. 2; Osorius de Rebus
gest. Eman. lib. 11. When a country is overstocked with
people, as a pasture is oft overlaid with cattle, they had
wont in former times to disburden themselves, by sending out
colonies, or by wars, as those old Romans; or by employing
them at home abut some public buildings, as bridges, road-
ways, for which those Romans were famous in this island; as
Augustus Caesar did in Rome, the Spaniards in their Indian
mines, as at Potosi in Peru, where some 30,000 men are still
at work, 6000 furnaces ever boiling, &c. aqueducts, bridges,
havens, those stupend works of Trajan, Claudius, at Ostium,
Diociesiani Therma, Fucinus Lacus, that Piraeum in Athens,
made by Themistocles, amphitheatrums of curious marble, as at
Verona, Civitas Philippi, and Heraclea in Thrace, those
Appian and Flaminian ways, prodigious works all may witness;
and rather than they should be idle, as those Egyptian
Pharaohs, Maris, and Sesostris did, to task their subjects to
build unnecessary pyramids, obelisks, labyrinths, channels,
lakes, gigantic works all, to divert them from rebellion,
riot, drunkenness, Quo scilicet alantur, et ne vagando
laborare desuescant. (Buscoldus discursu polit. cap. 2
"whereby they are supported, and do not become vagrants by
being less accustomed to labour.")

Another eye-sore is that want of conduct and navigible
rivers, a great blemish as Boterus, Hippolitus a Collibus,
and other politicians hold, if it be neglected in a
commonwealth. Admirable cost and charge is bestowed in the
Low-countries on this behalf in the duchy of Milan, territory
of Padua, in a France, Italy, China, and so likewise about
corrivations of water to moisten and refresh barren grounds,
to drain fens, bogs, and moors. Massinissa made many inward
parts of Barbary and Numidia in Africa, before his time
incult and horrid, fruitful and bartable by this means. Great
industry is generally used all over the eastern countries in
this kind, especially in Egypt, about Babylon and Damascus,
as Vertomannus and Gotardus Arthus relate; about Barcelona,
Segovia, Murcia, and many other places of Spain, Milan in
Italy; by reason of which their soil is much impoverished,
and infinite commodities arise to the inhabitants.

The Turks of late attempted to cut that Isthmus betwixt
Africa and Asia, which Sesostris and Darius, and some
Pharaohs of Egypt had formerly undertaken, but with ill
success, as Diodonis Siculus records, and Pliny, for that
Red-sea being three cubits higher than Egypt, would have
drowned all the country, coepto destiterant, they left off;
yet as the same Diodorus writes, Ptolemy renewed the work
many years after, and absolved it in a more opportune place.

That Isthmus of Corinth was likewise undertaken to be made
navigable by Demetrius, by Julius Caesar, Nero, Domitian,
Herodes Atticus, to make a speedy passage, and less
dangerous, from the Ionian and Aegean seas; but because it
could not be so well affected, the Peloponnesians built a
wall like our Picts' wall about Schaenute, where Neptune's
temple stood, and in the shortest cut over the Isthmus, of
which Diodorus, lib. 11. Herodotus, lib. 8. Vran. Our latter
writers call it Hexamilium, which Aniurath the Turk
demolished, the Venetians, anno 1453, repaired in 15 days
with 30,000 men. Some, saith Acosta, would have a passage cut
from Panama to Nombre de Dios in America; but Thuanus and
Serres the French historians speak of a famous aqueduct in
France, intended in Henry the Fourth's time, from the Loire
to the Seine, and from Rhodanus to the Loire. The like to
which was formerly assayed by Domitian the emperor, from Arar
to Moselle, which Cornelius Tacitus speaks of in the 13th of
his annals, after by Charles the Great and others. Much cost
hath in former times been bestowed in either new making or
mending channels of rivers, and their passages, (as
Aurelianus did by Tiber to make it navigable to Rome, to
convey corn from Egypt to the city, vadum alvei tumentis
effodit saith Vopiscus, et Tiberis ripas extruxit, he cut
fords, made banks, &c.) decayed havens, which Claudius the
emperor, with infinite pains and charges, attempted at Ostia,
as I have said, the Venetians at this day to preserve their
city; many excellent means to enrich their territories, have
been fostered, invented in most provinces of Europe, as
planting some Indian plants amongst us, silk-worms, the very
mulberry leaves in the plains of Granada yield 30,000 crowns
per annum to the king of Spain's coffers, besides those many
trades and artificers that are busied about them in the
kingdom of Granada, Murcia, and all over Spain. In France a
great benefit is raised by salt, &c., whether these things
might not be as happily attempted with us, and with like
success, it may be controverted, silk-worms (I mean), vines,
fir trees, &c. Cardan exhorts Edward the Sixth to plant
olives, and is fully persuaded they would prosper in this
island. With us, navigable rivers are most part neglected;
our streams are not great, I confess, by reason of the
narrowness of the island, yet they run smoothly and even, not
headlong, swift, or amongst rocks and shelves, as foaming
Rhodanus and Loire in France, Tigris in Mesopotamia, violent
Durius in Spain, with cataracts and whirlpools, as the Rhine,
and Danubius, about Shaffausen, Lausenburgh, Linz, and
Cremmes, to endanger navigators; or broad shallow, as Neckar
in the Palatinate, Tibris in Italy; but calm and fair as Arar
in France, Hebrus in Macedonia, Eurotas in Laconia, they
gently glide along, and might as well be repaired many of
them (I mean Wye, Trent, Ouse, Thamisis at Oxford, the defect
of which we feel in the mean time) as the River of Lee from
Ware to London. B. Atwater of old, or as some will Henry I.,
made a channel from Trent to Lincoln, navigable; which now,
saith Mr. Camden, is decayed, and much mention is made of
anchors, and such like monuments found about old Verulamium,
good ships have formerly come to Exeter, and many such
places, whose channels, havens, ports, are now barred and
rejected. We contemn this benefit of carriage by waters, and
are therefore compelled in the inner parts of this island,
because portage is so dear, to eat up our commodities
ourselves, and live like so many boars in a sty, for want of
vent and utterance.

We have many excellent havens, royal havens, Falmouth,
Portsmouth, Milford, &c. equivalent if not to be preferred to
that Indian Havanna, old Brindusium in Italy, Aulis in
Greece, Ambracia in Acarnia, Suda in Crete, which have few
ships in them, little or no traffic or trade, which have
scarce a village on them, able to bear great cities, sed
viderint politici. I could here justly tax many other
neglects, abuses, errors, defects among us, and in other
countries, depopulations, riot, drunkenness, &c. and many
such, quae nunc in aurem susurrare non tibet. But I must take
heed, ne quid gravius dicam, that I do not overshoot myself,
Sus Minervam, I am forth of my element, as you peradventure
suppose; and sometimes veritas odium parit, as he said,
"verjuice and oatmeal is good for a parrot." For as Lucian
said of an historian, I say of a politician. He that will
freely speak and write, must be for ever no subject, under no
prince or law, but lay out the matter truly as it is, not
caring what any can, will, like or dislike.

We have good laws, I deny not, to rectify such enormities,
and so in all other countries, but it seems not always to
good purpose. We had need of some general visitor in our age,
that should reform what is amiss; a just army of Rosie-crosse
men, for they will amend all matters (they say), religion,
policy, manners, with arts; sciences, &c. Another Attila,
Tamerlane, Hercules, to strive with Achelous, Augeae stabulum
purgare, to subdue tyrants, as he did Diomedes and Busris: to
expel thieves, as he did Cacus and Lacinius: to vindicate
poor captives, as he did Hesione: to pass the torrid zone,
the deserts of Lybia, and purge the world of monsters and
Centaurs: or another Theban Crates to reform our manners, to
compose quarrels and controversies, as in his time he did,
and was therefore adored for a god in Athens. "As Hercules
purged the world of monsters, and subdued them, so did he
fight against envy, lust, anger, avarice, &c. and all those
feral vices and monsters of the mind? it were to be wished we
had some such visitor, or if wishing would serve, one had
such a ring or rings, as Timolaus desired in Lucian, by
virtue of which he should be as strong as 10,000 men, or an
army of giants, go invisible, open gates and castle doors,
have what treasure he would, transport himself in an instant
to what place he desired, alter affections, cure all manner
of diseases, that he might range over the world, and reform
all distressed states and persons, as he would himself. He
might reduce those wandering Tartars in order, that infest
China on the one side, Muscovy, Poland, on the other; and
tame the vagabond Arabians that rob and spoil those eastern
countries, that they should never use more caravans, or
janizaries to conduct them. He might root out barbarism out
of America, and fully discover Terra Australis Incognita,
find out the north-east and north-west passages, drain those
mighty Maeotian fens, cut down those vast Hircinian woods,
irrigate those barren Arabian deserts, &c. cure us of our
epidemical diseases, scorbutum, plica, morbus Neapolitanus,
&c., end all our idle controversies, cut off our tumultuous
desires, inordinate lusts, root out atheism, impiety, heresy,
schism, and superstition, which now so crucify the world,
catechise gross ignorance, purge Italy of luxury and riot,
Spain of superstition and jealousy, Germany of drunkenness,
all our northern country of gluttony and intemperance,
castigate our hard-hearted parents, masters, tutors; lash
disobedient children, negligent servants, correct these
spendthrifts and prodigal sons, enforce idle persons to work,
drive drunkards off the alehouse, repress thieves, visit
corrupt and tyrannizing magistrates, &c. But as L. Licinius
taxed Timolaus, you may us. These are vain, absurd and
ridiculous wishes not to be hoped: and must be as it is,
Bocchalinus may cite commonwealths to come before Apollo, and
seek to reform the world itself by commissioners, but there
is no remedy, it may not be redressed, desinent homines tum
demum stultescere quando esse destinet, so long as they can
wag their beards, they will play the knaves and fools.

Because, therefore, it is a thing so difficult, impossible,
and far beyond Hercules' labours to be performed; let them be
rude, stupid, ignorant, incult, lapis super lapidem sedeat,
and as the apologist will, resp. tussi, et graveolentia
laboret, mundus vitio, let them be barbarous as they are, let
them tyrannize, epicurize, oppress, luxuriate, consume
themselves with factions, superstitions, lawsuits, wars and
contentions, live in riot, poverty, want, misery; rebel,
wallow as so many swine in their own dung, with Ulysses'
companions, stultos jubeo esse libenter. I will yet, to
satisfy and please myself, make an Utopia of mine own a new
Atlantis, a poetical commonwealth of mine own, in which I
will freely domineer, build cities, make laws, statutes, as I
list myself. And why may I not? -- Pictoribus atque poetis,
&c. You know what liberty poets ever had, and besides, my
predecessor Democritus was a politician, a recorder of
Abdera, a law maker as some say; and why may not I presume so
much as he did? Howsoever I will adventure. For the site, if
you will needs urge me to it, I am not fully resolved, it may
be in Terra Australis Incognita, there is room enough (for of
my knowledge neither that hungry Spaniard, nor Mercurius
Britannicus, have yet discovered half of it) or else one of
those floating islands in Mare del Zur, which like the
Cyanian isles in the Euxine sea, alter their place, and are
accessible only at set times, and to some few persons; or one
of the Fortunate isles, for who knows yet where, or which
they are? there is room enough in the inner parts of America,
and northern coasts of Asia. But I will choose a site, whose
latitude shall be 45 degrees (I respect not minutes) in the
midst of the temperate zone, or perhaps under the equator,
that paradise of the world, ubi semper virens laurus, &c.
where is a perpetual spring: the longitude for some reasons I
will conceal. Yet "be it known to all men by these presents,"
that if any honest gentle man will send in so much money, as
Cardan allows an astrologer for casting a nativity, he shall
be a share; I will acquaint him with my project, or if any
worthy man will stand for any temporal or spiritual office or
dignity, (for as he said of his archbishops of Utopia, 'tis
sanctus ambitus, and not amiss to be sought after,) it shall
be freely given without all intercessions, bribes, letters,
&c. his own worth shall be the best spokesman; and because we
shall admit of no deputies or advowsons, if he be
sufficiently qualified, and as able as willing to execute the
place himself, he shall have present possession. It shall be
divided into 12 or 13 provinces, and those by hills, rivers,
road-ways, or some more eminent limits exactly bounded. Each
province shall have a metropolis, which shall be so placed as
a centre almost in a circumference, and the rest at equal
distances, some Italian miles asunder, or thereabout, and in
them shall be sold all things necessary for the use of man;
statis horis et diebus, no market towns, markets or fairs,
for they do but beggar cities (no village shall stand above
6, 7, or 8 miles from a city) except those emporiums which
are by the sea side, general staples, marts, as Antwerp,
Venice, Bergen of old, London, &c. cities most part shall be
situated upon navigable rivers or lakes, creeks, havens; and
for their form, regular, round, square, or long square, with
fair, broad, and straight streets, houses uniform, built of
brick and stone, like Bruges, Brussels, Rhegium Lepidi, Berne
in Switzerland, Milan, Mantua, Crema, Cambalu in Tartary,
described by M. Polus, or that Venetian palma. I will admit
very few or no suburbs, and those of baser building, walls
only to keep out man and horse, except it be in some frontier
towns, or by the sea side, and those to be fortified after
the latest manner of fortification, and situated upon
convenient havens, or opportune places. In every so built
city, I will have convenient churches, and separate places to
bury the dead in, not in churchyards; a citadella (in some,
not all) to command it, prisons for offenders, opportune
market-places of all sorts, for corn, meat, cattle, fuel,
fish, commodious courts of justice, public halls for all
societies, bourses, meeting places, armouries, in which shall
be kept engines for quenching of fire, artillery gardens,
public walks, theatres, and spacious fields allotted for all
gymnastic sports, and honest recreations, hospitals of all
kinds, for children, orphans, old folks, sick men, mad men,
soldiers, pest houses, &c. not built precario, or by gouty
benefactors, who, when by fraud and rapine they have extorted
all their lives, oppressed whole provinces, societies, &c.
give something to pious uses, build a satisfactory alms-
house, school or bridge, &c. at their last end or before
perhaps, which is no otherwise than to steal a goose, and
stick down a feather, rob a thousand to relieve ten; and
those hospitals so built and maintained, not by collections,
benevolences, donaries, for a set number, (as in ours,) just
so many and no more at such a rate, but for all those who
stand in need, be they more or less, and that ex publico
aerario, and so still maintained, non nobis solum nati sumus,
&c. I will have conduits of sweet and good water, aptly
disposed in each town, common granaries, as at Dresden in
Misnia, Stetein in Pomerland, Noremberg, &c. Colleges of
mathematicians, musicians, and actors, as of old at Labedum
in Ionia, alchymists, physicians, artists, and philosophers:
that all arts and sciences may sooner be perfected and better
learned; and public historiographers, as amongst those
ancient Persians, qui in commentarios referebant quae
memoratu digna gerebantur, informed and appointed by the
state to register all famous acts, and not by each
insufficient scribbler, partial or parasitical pedant, as in
our times. I will provide public schools of all kinds,
singing, dancing, fencing, &c. especially of grammar and
language; not to be taught by those tedious precepts
ordinarily used, but by use, example, conversation, as
travellers learn abroad, and nurses teach their children: as
I will have all such places, so will I ordain public
governors, fit officers to each place, treasurers, aediles,
questors, overseers of pupils, widows' goods, and all public
houses, &c. and those once a year to make strict accounts of
all receipts, expenses, to avoid confusion, et sic fiet ut
non absumant (as Pliny to Trajan,) quod pudeat dicere. They
shall be subordinate to those higher officers and governors
of each city, which shall not be poor tradesmen, and mean
artificers, but noblemen and gentlemen, which shall be tied
to residence in those towns they dwell next, at such set
times and seasons: for I see no reason (which Hippolitus
complains of) "that it should be more dishonourable for
noblemen to govern the city than the country, or unseemly to
dwell there now, than of old." I will have no bogs, fens,
marshes, vast woods, deserts, heaths, commons, but all
inclosed; (yet not depopulated, and therefore take heed you
mistake me not) for that which is common, and every man's, is
no man's; the richest countries are still inclosed, as Essex,
Kent, with us, &c. Spain, Italy; and where inclosures are
least in quantity, they are best husbanded, as about Florence
in Italy, Damascus in Syria, &c. which are liker gardens than
fields. I will not have a barren acre in all my territories,
not so much as the tops of mountains: where nature fails, it
shall be supplied by art: lakes and rivers shall not be left
desolate. All common highways, bridges, banks, corrivations
of waters, aqueducts, channels, public works, building, &c.
out of a stock, curiously maintained and kept in repair; no
depopulations, engrossings, alterations of wood, arable, but
by the consent of some supervisors that shall be appointed
for that purpose, to see what reformation ought to be had in
all places, what is amiss, how to help it, et quid
quaqueferat regio, et quid quaque recuset, what ground is
aptest for wood, what for corn, what for cattle, gardens,
orchards, fishponds, &c. with a charitable division in every
village, (not one domineering house greedily to swallow up
all, which is too common with us) what for lords, what for
tenants; and because they shall be better encouraged to
improve such lands they hold, manure, plant trees, drain,
fence. &c., they shall have long leases, a known rent, and
known fine to free them from those intolerable exactions of
tyrannizing landlords. These supervisors shall likewise
appoint what quantity of land in each manor is fit for the
lord's demesnes, what for holding of tenants, how it ought to
be husbanded, ut magnetis equis, Minyae gens cognita remis,
how to be manured, tilled, rectified, hic segetes veniunt,
illic foelicius uvae, arborei foetus alibi, atque injussa
virescunt Gramina, and what proportion is fit for all
callings, because private professors are many times idiots,
ill husbands, oppressors, covetous, and know not how to
improve their own, or else wholly respect their own, and not
public good.

Utopian parity is a kind of government, to be wished for,
rather than effected, Respub. Christianopolitana,
Campanella's city of the Sun, and that new Atlantis, witty
fictions, but mere chimeras and Plato's community in many
things is impious, absurd and ridiculous, it takes away all
splendour and magnificence. I will have several orders,
degrees of nobility, and those hereditary, not rejecting
younger brothers in the mean time, for they shall be
sufficiently provided for by pensions, or so qualified,
brought up in some honest calling, they shall be able to live
of themselves. I will have such a proportion of ground
belonging to every barony, he that buys the land shall buy
the barony, he that by riot consumes his patrimony, and
ancient demesnes, shall forfeit his. As some dignities shall
be hereditary, so some again by election, or by gift (besides
free offices, pensions, annuities,) like our bishoprics,
prebends, the Basso's palaces in Turkey, the procurators
houses and offices in Venice, which, like the golden apple,
shall be given to the worthiest, and best deserving both in
war and peace, as a reward of their worth and good service,
as so many goals for all to aim at, (honos alit artes) and
encouragernents to others. For I hate these severe,
unnatural, harsh, German, French, and Venetian decrees, which
exclude plebeians from honours, be they never so wise, rich,
virtuous, valiant, and well qualified, they must not be
patricians, but keep their own rank, this is naturae bellum
inferre, odious to God and men, I abhor it. My form of
government shall be monarchical.

--- "nunquam libertas gratior extat,
Quam sub Rege pio," &c.
(Liberty is never more gratifying than under a pious king)

Few laws, but those severely kept, plainly put down, and in
the mother tongue, that every man may understand. Every city
shall have a peculiar trade or privilege, by which it shall
be chiefly maintained: and parents shall teach their children
one of three at least, bring up and instruct them in the
mysteries of their own trade. In each town these several
tradesmen shall be so aptly disposed, as they shall free the
rest from danger or offence: fire-trades, as smiths, forge-
men, brewers, bakers, metal-men, &c., shall dwell apart by
themselves: dyers, tanners, felmongers, and such as use water
in convenient places by themselves: noisome or fulsome for
bad smells, as butchers' slaughter houses, chandlers,
curriers, in remote places, and some back lanes. Fraternities
and companies, I approve of as merchants' bourses, colleges
of druggists, physicians, musicians, &c., but all trades to
be rated in the sale of wares, as our clerks of the market do
bakers and brewers; corn itself what scarcity soever shall
come, not to exceed such a price. Of such wares as are
transported or brought in, if they be necessary, commodious,
and such as nearly concern man's life, as corn, wood, coal,
&c., and such provision we cannot want, I will have little or
no custom paid, no taxes; but for such things as are for
pleasure, delight, or ornament, as wine, spice, tobacco,
silk, velvet, cloth of gold, lace, jewels, &c., a greater
impost. I will have certain ships sent out for new
discoveries every year, and some discreet men appointed to
travel into all neighbouring kingdoms by land, which shall
observe what artificial inventions and good laws are in other
countries, customs, alterations, or aught else, concerning
war or peace, which may tend to the common good.
Ecclesiastical discipline, penes Episcopos, subordinate as
the other. No impropriations, no lay patrons of church
livings, or one private man, but common societies,
corporations, &c., and those rectors of benefices to be
chosen out of the Universities, examined and approved, as the
literati in China. No parish to contain above a thousand
auditors. If it were possible, I would have such priests as
should imitate Christ, charitable lawyers should love their
neighbours as themselves, temperate and modest physicians,
politicians contemn the world, philosophers should know
themselves, noblemen live honestly, tradesmen leave lying and
cozening, magistrates, corruption, &c., but this is
impossible, I must get such as I may. I will therefore have
of lawyers, judges, advocates, physicians, chirurgeons, &c.,
a set number, and every man, if it be possible, to plead his
own cause, to tell that tale to the judge which he doth to
his advocate, as at Fez in Africa, Bantam, Aleppo, Ragusa,
suam quisque causam dicere tenetur. Those advocates,
chirurgeons, and physicians, which are allowed to be
maintained out of the common treasury, no fees to be given or
taken upon pain of losing their places; or if they do, very
small fees, and when the cause is fully ended. He that sues
any man shall put in a pledge, which if it be proved be hath
wrongfully sued his adversary, rashly or maliciously, he
shall forfeit, and lose. Or else before any suit begin, the
plaintiff shall have his complaint approved by a set delegacy
to that purpose; if it be of moment he shall be suffered as
before, to proceed, if otherwise they shall determine it. All
causes shall be pleaded suppresso nomine, the parties' names
concealed, if some circumstances do not otherwise require.
Judges and other officers shall be aptly disposed in each
province, villages, cities, as common arbitrators to hear
causes, and end all controversies, and those not single, but
three at least on the bench at once, to determine or give
sentence, and those again to sit by turns or lots, and not to
continue still in the same office. No controversy to depend
above a year, but without all delays and further appeals to
be speedily dispatched, and finally concluded in that time
allotted. These and all other inferior magistrates to be
chosen as the literati in China or by those exact suffrages
of the Venetians, and such again not to be eligible, or
capable of magistracies, honours, offices, except they be
sufficiently qualified for learning, manners, and that by the
strict approbation of reputed examiners: first scholars to
take place, then soldiers; for I am of Vigetius his opinion,
a scholar deserves better than a soldier, because Unius
aetatis sunt quae fortiter fiunt, quae vero pro utilate
Reipub. scribuntur, aeterna: a soldier's work lasts for an
age, a scholar's for ever. If they misbehave themselves, they
shall be deposed, and accordingly punished, and whether their
offices be annual or otherwise, once a year they shall be
called in question, and give an account; for men are partial
and passionate, merciless, covetous, corrupt, subject to
love, hate, fear, favour, &c., omne sub regno graviore
regnum: like Solon's Areopagites, or those Roman Censors,
some shall visit others, and the visited invicem themselves,
shall oversee that no prowling officer, under colour of
authority, shall insult over his inferiors, as so many wild
beasts, oppress, domineer, flea, grind, or trample on, be
partial or corrupt, but that there be aequabile jus, justice
equally done, live as friends and brethren together; and
which Sesellius would have and so much desires in his kingdom
of France, "a diapason and sweet harmony of kings, princes,
nobles, and plebeians so mutually tied and involved in love,
as well as laws and authority, as that they never disagree,
insult or encroach one upon another." If any man deserves
well in his office he shall be rewarded.
--- "quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas?" ---
"For who would cultivate virtue itself, if you were to take
away the reward?"
He that invents anything for public good in any art or
science, writes a treatise, or performs any noble exploit, at
home or abroad, he shall be accordingly enriched, honoured,
and preferred. I say with Hannibal in Ennius, Hostem qui
feriet erit mihi Carthaginiensis, let him be of what
condition he will, in all offices, actions, he that deserves
best shall have best.

Tilianus in Philonius, out of a charitable mind no doubt,
wished all his books were gold and silver, jewels and
precious stones, to redeem captives, set free prisoners, and
relieve all poor distressed souls that wanted means;
religiously done, I deny not, but to what purpose? Suppose
this were so well done, within a little after, though a man
had Orcesus' wealth to bestow, there would be as many more.
Wherefore I will suffer no beggars, rogues, vagabonds, or
idle persons at all, that cannot give an account of their
lives how they maintain themselves. If they be impotent,
lame, blind, and single, they shall be sufficiently
maintained in several hospitals, built for that purpose; if
married and infirm, past work, or by inevitable loss, or some
such like misfortune cast behind, by distribution of corn,
house-rent free, annual pensions or money, they shall be
relieved, and highly rewarded for their good service they
have formerly done; if able, they shall be enforced to work.
"For I see no reason (as he said) why an epicure or idle
drone, a rich glutton, a usurer, should live at ease and do
nothing, live in honour, in all manner of pleasure; and
oppress others, when as in the meantime a poor labourer, a
smith, a carpenter, an husbandman that hath spent his time in
continual labour, as an ass to carry burdens to do the
commonwealth good, and without whom we cannot live, shall be
left in his old age to beg or starve, and lead a miserable
life worse than a jument." As all conditions shall be tied to
their task, so none shall be overtired, but have their set
times of recreations and holidays, indulgere genio, feasts
and merry meetings, even to the meanest artificer, or basest
servant, once a week to sing or dance, (though not all at
once) or do whatsoever he shall please; like that Saccarum
festum amongst the Persians, those Saturnals in Rome, as well
as his master. If any be drunk, he shall drink no more wine
or strong drink in a twelvemonth after. A bankrupt shall be
Catademiatus in Amphitheatro, publicly shamed, and he that
cannot pay his debts, if by riot or negligence, he have been
impoverished, shall be for a twelvemonth imprisoned, if in
that space his creditors be not satisfied, he shall be
hanged. He that commits sacrilege shall lose his hands; he
that bears false witness, or is of perjury convicted, shall
have his tongue cut out, except he redeem it with his head.
Murder, adultery, shall be punished by death, but not theft,
except it he some more grievous offence, or notorious
offenders: otherwise they shall be condemned to the galleys,
mines, be his slaves whom they have offended, during their
lives. I hate all hereditary slaves, and that duram Persarum
legem as Brisonius calls it; or as Ammianus, impendio
formidatas et abominandas leges, per quas ob noxeim unius,
omnis propinquitas perit, hard law that wife and children,
friends and allies, should suffer for the father's offence.

No man shall marry until he be 25, no woman till she be 20,
nisi aliter dispensatum fuerit. If one die, the other party
shall not marry till six months after; and because many
families are compelled to live niggardly, exhaust and undone
by great dowers, none shall be given at all, or very little,
and that by supervisors rated, they that are foul shall have
a greater portion; if fair, none at all, or very little:
howsoever not to exceed such a rate as those supervisors
shall think fit. And when once they come to those years,
poverty shall hinder no man from marriage, or any other
respect, but all shall be rather enforced than hindered,
except they be dismembered, or grievously deformed, infirm,
or visited with some enormous hereditary disease, in body or
mind; in such cases upon a great pain, or mulct, man or woman
shall not marry, other order shall be taken for them to their
content. If people overabound, they shall be eased by
colonies.

No man shall wear weapons in any city. The same attire shall
be kept, and that proper to several callings, by which, they
shall be distinguished. Luxus funerum shall be taken away,
that intempestive expense moderated, and many others.
Brokers, takers of pawns, biting usurers, I will not admit;
yet because hic cum hominibus non cum diis agitur, we
converse here with men, not with gods, and for the hardness
of men's hearts, I will tolerate some kind of usury. If we
were honest, I confess, si probi essemus, we should have no
use of it, but being as it is, we must necessarily admit it.
Howsoever most divines contradict it, dicimus inficias, sed
vox ea sola reperta est, it must be winked at by politicians.
And yet some great doctors approve of it, Calvin, Bucer,
Zanchius, P. Martyr, because by so many grand lawyers,
decrees of emperors, princes' statutes, customs of
commonwealths, churches' approbations, it is permitted, &c. I
will therefore allow it. But to no private persons, nor to
every man that will, to orphans only, maids, widows, or such
as by reason of their age, sex, education, ignorance of
trading, know not otherwise how to employ it; and those so
approved, not to let it out apart, but to bring their money
to a common bank which shall be allowed in every city, as in
Genoa, Geneva, Nuremberg, Venice, at 5, 6, 7, not above 8 per
centum, as the supervisors, or aerarii praefecti shall think
fit. And as it shall not be lawful for each man to be an
usurer that will, so shall it not be lawful for all to take
up money at use, not to prodigals and spendthrifts, but to
merchants, young tradesmen, such as stand in need, or know
honestly how to employ it, whose necessity, cause and
condition the said supervisors shall approve of.

I will have no private monopolies, to enrich one man, and
beggar a multitude, multiplicity of offices, of supplying by
deputies, weights and measures, the same throughout, and
those rectified by the Primum mobile, and sun's motion,
threescore miles to a degree according to observation, 1000
geometrical paces to a mile, five foot to a pace, twelve
inches to a foot, &c. and from measures known it is an easy
matter to rectify weights, &c. to cast up all, and resolve
bodies by algebra, stereometry. I hate wars if they be not ad
populi salutem, upon urgent occasion, "odimus accipitrem,
quia semper vivit in armis," (we hate the hawk, because he
always lives in battle) offensive wars, except the cause be
very just, I will not allow of. For I do highly magnify that
saying of Hannibal to Scipio, in Livy, "It had been a blessed
thing for you and us, if God had given that mind to our
predecessors, that you had been content with Italy, we with
Africa. For neither Sicily nor Sardinia are worth such cost
and pains, so many fleets and armies, or so many famous
Captains' lives." Omnia prius tentanda, fair means shall
first be tried. Peragit tranquilla potestas, Quod violenta
nequit. I will have then proceed with all moderation: but
hear you, Fabius my general, not Minutius, nam qui Consilio
nititur plus hostibus nocet, quam qui sine ainimi ratione
viribus: And in such wars to abstain as much as is possible
from depopulation; burning of towns, massacring of infants,
&c. For defensive wars, I will have forces still ready at a
small warning, by land and sea, a prepared navy, soldiers in
procinctu, et quam Bonfinius apud Hungaros suos vult, virgam
ferream, and money, which is nervus belli, still in a
readiness, and a sufficient revenue, a third part as in old
Rome and Egypt, reserved for the commonwealth; to avoid those
heavy taxes and impositions, as well to defray this charge of
wars, as also all other public defalcations, expenses, fees,
pensions, reparations, chaste sports, feasts, donaries,
rewards, and entertainments. All things in this nature
especially I will have maturely done, and with great 
deliberation: ne quid temere, ne quid remisse at timide fiat;
sed quo feror hospes? To prosecute the rest would require a
volume. Manum de tabella, I have been over tedious in this
subject; I could have here willingly ranged, but these
straits wherein I am included will not permit.

From commonwealths and cities, I will descend to families,
which have as many corsives and molestations, as frequent
discontents as the rest. Great affinity there is betwixt a
political and economical body; they differ only in magnitude
and proportion of business (so Scaliger writes) as they have
both likely the same period, as a Bodin and Peucer hold, out
of Plato, six or seven hundred years, so many times they have
the same means of their vexation and overthrows; as namely,
riot, a common ruin of both, riot in building, riot in
profuse spending, riot in apparel, &c. be it in what kind
soever, it produceth the same effects. A corographer of ours
speaking obiter of ancient families, why they are so frequent
in the north, continue so long, are so soon extinguished in
the south, and so few, gives no other reason but this, luxus
omnia dissipavit, riot hath consumed all, fine clothes and
curious buildings came into this island, as he notes in his
annals, not so many years since; non sine dispendio
hospitalitatis, to the decay of hospitality. Howbeit many
times that word is mistaken, and under the name of bounty and
hospitality, is shrouded riot and prodigality, and that which
is commendable in itself well used, hath been mistaken
heretofore, is become by his abuse, the bane and utter ruin
of many a noble family. For some men live like the rich
glutton, consuming themselves and their substance by
continual feasting and invitations, with Axilon in Homer,
keep open house for all comers, giving entertainment to such
as visit them, keeping a table beyond their means, and a
company of idle servants (though not so frequent as of old)
are blown up on a sudden; and as Actaeon was by his hounds,
devoured by their kinsmen, friends, and multitude of
followers. It is a wonder that Paulus Jovius relates of our
northern countries, what an infinite deal of meat we consume
on our tables; that I may truly say, 'tis not bounty, not
hospitality, as it is often abused, but riot and excess,
gluttony and prodigality; a mere vice; it brings in debt,
want, and beggary, hereditary diseases, consumes their
fortunes, and overthrows the good temperature of their
bodies. To this I might here well add their inordinate
expense in building, those fantastical houses, turrets,
walks, parks, &c., gaming, excess of pleasure, and that
prodigious riot in apparel, by which means they are compelled
to break up house, and creep into holes. Sesellius in his
commonwealth of France, gives three reasons why the French
nobility were so frequently bankrupts: "First, because they
had so many law-suits and contentions one upon another, which
were tedious and costly; by which means it came to pass, that
commnnly lawyers bought them out of their possessions. A
second cause was their riot, they lived beyond their means,
and were therefore swallowed up by merchants." (La Nove, a
French writer, yields five reasons of his countrymens'
poverty, to the same effect almost, and thinks verily if the
gentry of France were divided into ten parts, eight of them
would be found much impaired, by sales, mortgages, and debts,
or wholly sunk in their estates.) "The last was immoderate
excess in apparel, which consumed their revenues." How this
concerns and agrees with our present state, look you. But of
this elsewhere. As it is in a man's body, if either head,
heart, stomach, liver, spleen, or any one part be
misaffected, all the rest suffer with it: so is it with this
economical body. If the head be naught, a spendthrift, a
drunkard, a whoremaster, a gamester, how shall the family
live at ease? Ipsa si cupiat salus serrate prorsus, non
potest, hanc familiam, as Demea said in the comedy, Safety
herself cannot save it. A good, honest, painful man many
times hath a shrew to his wife, a sickly, dishonest,
slothful, foolish, careless woman to his mate, a proud,
peevish flirt, a liquorish, prodigal quean, and by that means
all goes to ruin: or if they differ in nature, he is thrifty,
she spends all, he wise, she sottish and soft; what agreement
can there be? what friendship? Like that of the thrush and
swallow in Aesop, instead of mutual love, kind compellations,
whore and thief is heard, they fling stools at one another's
heads. Quae intemperies vexat hanc familiam? All enforced
marriages commonly produce such effects, or if on their
behalfs it be well, as to live and agree lovingly together,
they may have disobedient and unruly children, that take ill
courses to disquiet them,  "their son is a thief, a
spendthrift, their daughter a whore;" a step-mother, or a
daughter-in-law, distempers all; or else for want of means,
many torturers arise, debts, dues, fees, dowries, jointures,
legacies to be paid, annuities issuing out, by means of
which, they have not wherewithal to maintain themselves in
that pomp as their predecessors have done, bring up or bestow
their children to their callings, to their birth and quality,
and will not descend to their present fortunes. Oftentimes,
too, to aggravate the rest, concur many other inconveniences,
unthankful friends, decayed friends, bad neighbours,
negligent servants, servi furaces, versipelles, callidi, 
occlusa sibi mille clavibus reserant, furtimque; raptant,
consumunt, liguriunt; casualties, taxes, mulcts, chargeable
offices, vain expenses, entertainments, loss of stock,
enmities, emulations, frequent invitations, losses,
suretyship, sickness, death of friends, and that which is the
gulf of all, improvidence, ill husbandry, disorder and
confusion, by which means they are drenched on a sudden in
their estates, and at unawares precipitated insensibly into
an inextricable labyrinth of debts, cares, woes, want, grief,
discontent and melancholy itself.

I have done with families, and will now briefly run over some
few sorts and conditions of men. The most secure, happy,
jovial, and merry in the world's esteem are princes and great
men, free from melancholy: but for their cares, miseries,
suspicions, jealousies, discontents, folly and madness, I
refer you to Xenophon's Tyrannus, where king Hieron
discourseth at large with Simonides the poet, of this
subject. Of all others they are most troubled with perpetual
fears, anxieties, insomuch that, as he said in Valerius, if
thou knewest with what cares and miseries this robe were
stuffed, thou wouldst not stoop to take it up. Or put case
they be secure and free from fears and discontents, yet they
are void of reason too oft, and precipitate in their actions,
read all our histories, quos de stultis prodidere stulti,
Iliades, Aeneides, Annales, and what is the subject?

"Stultorum regum, et populorum continet aestus,"
The giddy tumults and the foolish rage
Of kings and people.

How mad they are, how furious, and upon small occasions, rash
and inconsiderate in their proceedings, how they doat, every
page almost will witness,

"--- delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi."
When doating monarchs urge
Unsound resolves, their subjects feel the scourge.


Next in place, next in miseries and discontents, in all
manner of hair-brain actions, are great men, procul a Jove,
procul a fulmine, the nearer the worse. If they live in
court, they are up and down, ebb and flow with their princes'
favours, Ingenium vultu statque caditque suo, now aloft, to-
morrow down, as Polybius describes them, "like so many
casting counters, now of gold, to-morrow of silver, that vary 
in worth as the computant will; now they stand for units, to-
morrow for thousands; now before all, and anon behind."
Beside, they torment one another with mutual factions,
emulations: one is ambitious, another enamoured, a third in
debt, a prodigal, overruns his fortunes, a fourth solicitous
with cares, gets nothing, &c. But for these men's
discontents, anxieties, I refer you to Lucian's Tract, de
mercede conductis, Aeneas Sylvius (libidinis et stultitiae
servos, he calls them), Agrippa, and many others.

Of philosophers and scholars priscae sapientiae dictatores, I
have already spoken in general term; those superintendents of
wit and learning, men above men, those refined men, minions
of the muses,

--- "mentemque habere queis bonam
Et esse corculis datum est." ---

These acute and subtle sophisters, so much honoured, have as
much need of hellebore as others. -- O medici mediam
pertundite venam. Read Lucian's Piscator, and tell how he
esteemed them; Agrippa's Tract of the vanity of Sciences;
nay, read their own works, their absurd tenets, prodigious
paradoxes, et risum teneatis amici? You shall find that of
Aristotle true, nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementia,
they have a worm as well as others; you shall find a
fantastical strain, a fustian, a bombast, a vainglorious
humour, an affected style, &c., like a prominent thread in an
uneven woven cloth, run parallel throughout their works. And
they that teach wisdom, patience, meekness, are the veriest
dizzards, hairbrains, and most discontent. "In the multitude
of wisdom is grief; and he that increaseth wisdom, increaseth
sorrow." I need not quote mine author; they that laugh and
contemn others, condemn the world of folly, deserve to be
mocked, are as giddyheaded, and lie as open as any other.
Democritus, that common flouter of folly, was ridiculous
himself; barking Menippus, scoffing Lucian, satirical
Lucilius Petronius, Varro, Persius. &c., may be censured with
the rest, Loripedem rectus derideat, Aethiopiem albus. Bale,
Erasmus, Hospinian, Vives, Kemnisius, explode as a vast ocean
of obs and sols, school divinity. A labyrinth of intricable
questions, unprofitable contentions, incredibilem
delirationem, one calls it, if school divinity be so
censured, subtilis Scotus lima veritatis, Occam
irrefragabiiis, cujus ingenium vetera omnia ingenia
subvertit, &c. Baconthrope, Dr. Resolutus, and Corculum
Theologia, Thomas himself, Doctor Seraphicus, cui dictavit
Angelus, &c. What shall become of humanity? Ars stulta, what
can she plead? What can her followers say for themselves?
Much learning, cere-diminuit-brum, hath cracked their sconce,
and taken such root, that tribus Anticyris caput insanabile,
hellebore itself can do no good, nor that renowned lanthorn
of Epictetus, by which if any man studied, he should be as
wise as he was. But all will not serve; rhetoricians, in
ostentationem loquacitatis multa agitant, out of their
volubility of tongue, will talk much to no purpose, orators
can persuade other men what they will, quo volunt, unde
volunt, move, pacify, &c., but cannot settle their own
brains, what saith Tully? Malo indesertam prudentiam, quam
loquacem stultitiam; and as Seneca seconds him, a wise man's
oration should not be polite or solicitous. Fabius esteems no
better of most of them, either in speech, action, gesture,
than as men beside themselves, insanos declamatores; so doth
Gregory, Non mihi sapit qui sermone, sed qui factis sapit.
Make the best of him, a good orator is a turncoat, an evil
man, bonus orator pessimus vir, his tongue is set to sale, he
is a mere voice, as he said of a nightingale, dat sine mente
sonum, an hyperbolical liar, a flatterer, a parasite and as
Ammianus Marcellinus will, a corrupting cozener, one that
doth more mischief by his fair speeches, than he that bribes
by money; for a man may with more facility avoid him that
circumvents by money, than him that deceives with glozing
terms; which made Socrates so much abhor and explode them.
Fracastorius, a famous poet, freely grants all poets to be
mad; so doth Scaliger; and who doth not? Aut insanit homo,
aut versus facit (He's mad or making verses), Hor. Sat. vii.
1. 2. Insanire lubet, i.e. versus componere. Virg. 3 Ecl.; So
Servius interprets it, all poets are mad, a company of bitter
satirists, detractors, or else parasitical applauders: and
what is poetry itself but as Austin holds, Vinum erroris ab
ebriis doctoribus propinatum? You may give that censure of
them in general, which Sir Thomas More once did of Germanus
Brixius' poems in particular.

--- "vehuntur
In rate stultitiae, sylvam habitant Furiae."
("They are borne in the bark of folly, and dwell in the grove
of madness")


Budaeus, in an epistle of his to Lupsetus, will have civil
law to be the tower of wisdom; another honours physic, the
quintessence of nature; a third tumbles them both down, and
sets up the flag of his own peculiar science. Your
supercilious critics, grammatical triflers, note-makers,
curious antiquaries, find out all the ruins of wit,
ineptiarum delicias, amongst the rubbish of old writers; Pro
stultis habent nisi aliquid sufficiant invenire, quod in
aliorum scriptis vertant vitio, all fools with them that
cannot find fault; they correct others, and are hot in a cold
cause, puzzle themselves to find out how many streets in
Rome, houses, gates, towers, Homer's country, Aeneas's
mother, Niobe's daughters, an Sappho publica fuerit? ovum
prius extiterit an gallina! &c. et alia quae dediscenda
essent scire, si scires, as Seneca holds. What clothes the
senators did wear in Rome, what shoes, how they sat, where
they went to the closestool, how many dishes in a mess, what
sauce, which for the present for an historian to relate,
according to Lodovic. Vives, is very ridiculous, is to them
most precious elaborate stuff, they admired for it, and as
proud, as triumphant in the meantime for this discovery, as
if they had won a city, or conquered a province; as rich as
if they had found a mine of gold ore. Quosvis auctores
absurdis commentis suis percacant et stercorant, one saith,
they bewray and daub a company of books and good authors,
with their absurd comments, correctorum sterquilinia Scaliger
calls them, and show their wit in censuring others, a company
of foolish note-makers, humble-bees, dors, or beetles, inter
stercora ut plurimum versantur, they rake over all those
rubbish and dunghills, and prefer a manuscript many times
before the Gospel itself; thesaurum criticum, before any
treasure, and with their deleaturs, alii legunt sic, meus
codex sic habet, with their postremae editiones, annotations,
castigations, &c., make books dear, themselves ridiculous,
and do nobody good, yet if any man dare oppose or contradict,
they are mad, up in arms on a sudden, how many sheets are
written in defence, how bitter invective; what apologies?
Epiphillides hae sunt ut merae nugae. But I dare say no more 
of, for, with, or against them, because I am liable to their
lash as well as others. Of these and the rest of our artists
and philosophers, I will generally conclude they are a kind
of madmen, as Seneca esteems of them, to make doubts and
scruples, how to read them truly, to mend old authors, but
will not mend their own lives, or teach us ingenia sanare,
memoriam officiorum ingerere, ac fidem in rebus humanis
retinere, to keep our wits in order, or rectify our manners.
Numquid tibi clemens videtur, si istus operam impenderit? Is
not he mad that draws lines with Archimedes, whilst his house
is ransacked, and his city besieged, when the whole world is
in combustion, or we whilst our souls are in danger, (mors
sequitur, vita fugit) to spend our time in toys, idle
questions, and things of no worth?

That lovers are mad, I think no man will deny, Amare simul et
sapetur ispi Jovi non datur; Jupiter himself cannot intend
both at once.

"Non bene conveniunt, nec in una sede morantur
Majestas et amor."
("Majesty and Love do not agree well, nor dwell together.")


Tully, when he was invited to a second marriage, replied, he
could not simul amare et sapere, be wise and love both
together. Est orcus ille, vis est immedicabilis, et rabies
insana, love is madness, a hell, an incurable disease;
impotentem et insanam libidinem Seneca calls it, an impotent
and raging lust. I shall dilate this subject apart; in the
meantime let lovers sigh out the rest.

Nevisanus the lawyer holds it for an axiom, "most women are
fools," consilium foeminis invalidum; Seneca, men, be they
young or old; who doubts it, youth is mad as Elius in Tully,
Stulti adolescentuli, old age little better, deliri senes,
&c. Theophrastus, in the 107th year of his age, said he then
began to be wise, tum sapere coepit, and therefore lamented
his departure. If wisdom come so late, where shall we find a
wise man? Our old ones doat at threescore-and-ten. I would
cite more proofs, and a better author, but for the present,
let one fool point at another. Nevisanus hath as hard an
opinion of rich men, "wealth and wisdom cannot dwell
together," stultitiam patiuntur opes, and they do commonly
infatuare cor hominis, besot men; and as we see it, "fools
have fortune:" Sapientia non invenitur in terra suaviter
viventium. For beside a natural contempt of learning, which
accompanies such kind of men, innate idleness (for they will
take no pains), and which Aristotle observes, ubi mens
plurima, ibi minima fortuna, ubi plurima fortuna, ibi mens
perexigua, great wealth and little wit go commonly together:
they have as much brains some of them in their heads as in
their heels; besides this inbred neglect of liberal sciences,
and all arts, which should excolere mentem, polish the mind,
they have most part some gullish humour or other, by which
they are led; one is an Epicure, an Atheist, a second a
gamester, a third a whore-master (fit subjects all for a
satirist to work upon);

"Hic nuptarum insanit amoribus, hic puerorum."
One burns to madness for the wedded dame;
Unnatural lusts anothers heart inflame.

One is mad of hawking, hunting, cocking; another of
carousing, horse-riding, spending; a fourth of building,
fighting, &c., Insanit veteres statuat Damasippus emendo,
Damasippus hath an humour of his own, to be talked of:
Heliodorus the Carthaginian, another. In a word, as Scaliger
concludes of them all, they are Statuae erectae stultitiae,
the very statues or pillars of folly. Choose out of all
stories him that hath been most admired, you shall still
find, multa ad laudem, multa ad vituperationem magnifica, as
Berosus of Semiramis; omnes mortales militia triumphis
divitiis, &c., tum et luxu, coede, coeterisque vitiis
antecessit, as she had some good, so had she many bad parts.

Alexander, a worthy man, but furious in his anger, overtaken
in drink: Caesar and Scipio valiant and wise, but vain-
glorious, ambitious: Vespasian a worthy prince, but covetous: 
Hannibal, as he had mighty virtues, so had he many vices;
unam virtutem mille vitia comitantur, as Machiavel of Cosmo
de Medici, he had two distinct persons in him. I will
determine of them all, they are like these double or turning
pictures; stand before which you see a fair maid, on the one
side an ape, on the other an owl; look upon them at the first
sight, all is well, but further examine, you shall find them
wise on the one side, and fools on the other; in some few
things praiseworthy, in the rest incomparably faulty. I will
say nothing of their diseases, emulations, discontents,
wants, and such miseries: let poverty plead the rest in
Aristophanes' Plutus.

Covetous men, amongst others, are most mad. They have all the
symptoms of melancholy, fear, sadness, suspicion, &c., as
shall be proved in its proper place.

"Danda est hellebori multo pars maxima avaris."
Misers make Anticyra their own;
Its hellebore reserv'd for them alone.


And yet methinks prodigals are much madder than they, be of
what condition they will, that bear a public or private
purse; as Dutch writer censured Richard the rich duke of
Cornwall, suing to be emperor, for his profuse spending, qui
effudet pecuniam ante pedes principium Electorum sicut aquam,
that scattered money like water; I do censure them, Stulta
Anglia (saith he) quae tot denariis sponte est privata,
stulti principes Alemnaniae, qui nobiles jus suum pro pecunia
vendiderunt; spendthrifts, bribers, and bribetakers are
fools, and so are all they that cannot keep, disburse, or
spend their moneys well.

I might say the like of angry, peevish, envious, ambitious;
Anticyrae melior sorbere meracas; Epicures, Atheists,
Schismatics, Heretics; hi omnes habent imaginationem laesam
(saith Nymannus) "and their madness shall be evident." 2 Tim.
iii. 9. Fabatus, an Italian, holds seafaring men all mad;
"the ship is mad, for it never stands still; the mariners are
mad, to expose themselves to such imminent dangers: the
waters are raging mad, in perpetual motion: the winds are as
mad as the rest, they know not whence they come, whither they
would go: and those men are maddest of all that go to sea;
for one fool at home, they find forty abroad." He was a
madman that said it, and thou peradventure as mad to read it.
Foelix Platerus is of opinion all alchemists are mad, out of
their wits; Atheneus saith as much of fiddlers, et musarum
luscinias, Musicians, omna tibicines insaniunt; ubi semel
efflant, avolat illico mens, in comes music at one ear, out
goes wit at another. Proud and vain-glorious persons are
certainly mad; and so are lascivious; I can feel their pulses
beat hither; horn-mad some of them, to let others lie with
their wives, and wink at it.

To insist in all particulars, were an Herculean task, to
reckon up insanas substructiones, insanos labores, insanum
luxum, mad labours, mad books, endeavours, carriages, gross
ignorance, ridiculous actions, absurd gestures; insanum
gulam, insaniam villarum, insana jurgia, as Tullyterins them,
madness of villages, stupend structures; as those Aegyptian
Pyramids, Labyrinths and Sphinxes, which a company of crowned
asses, ad ostentationem opum, vainly built, when neither the
architect nor king that made them, or to what use and
purpose, are yet known: to insist in their hypocrisy,
inconstancy, blindness, rashness, dementam temeritatem,
fraud, cozenage, malice, anger, impudence, ingratitude,
ambition, gross superstition, tempora infecta et adulatione
sordida, as in Tiberius' times, such base flattery, stupend,
parasitic fawning and colloguing, &c., brawls, conflicts,
desires, contentions, it would ask an expert Vesalius to
anatomize every member.

Shall I say? Jupiter himself, Apollo, Mars, &c., doated; and
monster-conquering Hercules that subdued the world, and
helped others, could not relieve himself in this, but mad he
was at last. And where shall a man walk, converse with whom,
in what province, city, and not meet with Signiur Deliro, or
Hercules Furens, Maenades, and Corybantes? Their speeches say
no less. E fungis nati homines, or else they fetched their
pedigree from those that were struck by Samson with the jaw-
bone of an ass. Or from Deucalion and Pyrrha's stones, for
durum genus sumus, marmorei sumus, we are stony-hearted, and
savour too much of the stock, as if they had all heard that
enchanted horn of Astolpho, that English duke in Ariosto,
which never sounded but all his auditors were mad, and for
fear ready to make away with themselves; or landed in the mad
haven in the Euxine sea of Daphnis insana, which had a secret
quality to dementate; they are a company of giddyheads,
afternoon men, it is Midsummer moon still, and the dog-days
last all the year long, they are all mad. Whom shall I then
except? Ulricus Huttenus Nemo, nam nemo omnibus horis sapit,
Nemo nascitur sine vitiis, Crimine Nemo caret, Nemo sorte sua
vivit contentus, Nemo in amore sapit, Nemo bonus, Nemo
sapiens, Nemo est ex omne parte insanus, &c. (No one is wise
at all hours -- no one one born without faults -- no one free
from crime -- no one content with his lot -- no one in love
wise -- no good, or wise man perfectly happy) and therefore:
Nicholas Nemo, or Monsieur No-body, shall go free, Quid
valeat nemo, Nemo referre potest? But whom shall I except in
the second place? such as are silent, vir sapit qui pauca
loquitur; no better way to avoid folly and madness, than by
taciturnity. Whom in a third? all senators, magistrates; for
all fortunate men are wise, and conquerors valiant, and so
are all great men, non est bonum ludere cum diis, they are
wise by authority, good by their office and place, his licet
impune pessimos esse (some say) we must not speak of them,
neither is it fit; per me sint ommia protinus alba, I will
not think amiss of them. Whom next? Stoics? Sapiens Stoicus,
and he alone is subject to no perturbations, as Plutarch
scoffs at him, "he is not vexed with torments, or burnt with
fire, foiled by his adversary, sold of his enemy: though he
be wrinkled, sand-blind, toothless, and deformed; yet he is
most beautiful, and like a god, a king in conceit, though not
worth a groat." "He never doats, never mad, never sad, drunk,
because virtue cannot be taken away," as Zeno holds, "by
reason of strong apprehension," but he was mad to say so.
Anticyrae coelo huic est opus aut dolabra, he had need to be
bored, and so had all his fellows, as wise as they would seem
to be. Chrysippus himself liberally grants them to be fools
as well as others, at certain times, upon some occasions,
amitti virtutem ait per ebrietatem, aut atrabilarium morbum,
it may be lost by drunkenness or melancholy, he may be
sometimes crazed as well as the rest: ad summum sapiens nisi
quum pituita molesta. I should here except some Cynics,
Menippus, Diogenes, that Theban Crates; or to descend to
these times, that omniscious, only wise fraternity of the
Rosicrucians, those great theologues, politicians,
philosophers, physicians, philologers, artists, &c. of whom
S. Bridget, Albas Joacchimus, Leicenbergius, and such divine
spirits have prophesied, and made promise to the world, if at
least there be any such (Hen. Neuhusius makes a doubt of it,
Valentinus Ancireas and others) or an Elias artifex their
Theophrastian master; whom though Libavius and many deride
and carp at, yet some will have to be "the renewer of all
arts and sciences," reformer of the world, and now living,
for so Johannes Montanus Strigoniensis, that great patron of
Paracelsus, contends, and certainly avers "a most divine
man," and the quintessence of wisdom wheresoever he is; for
he, his fraternity, friends, &c. are all "betrothed to
wisdom," if we may believe their disciples and followers. I
must needs except Lipsius and the Pope, and expunge their
name out of the catalogue of fools. For besides that
parasitical testimony of Dousa,

"A Sole exoriente Maeotidas usque paludes,
Nemo est qui justo se aequiparare queat."
"From the rising sun to the Maeotid Lake, there was not one
that could fairly be put in comparison with them."

Lipsius saith of himself, that he was humani generis quidem
pedagogus voce et stylo, a grand signior, a master, a tutor
of us all, and for thirteen years he brags how he sowed
wisdom in the Low Countries, as Ammonius the philosopher
sometimes did in Alexandria, cum humanitate literas et
sapientiam cum prudentia: antistes sapientiae, he shall be
Sapientum Octavus. The Pope is more than a man, as his parats
often make him, a demi-god, and besides his holiness cannot
err, in Cathedra belike: and yet some of them have been
magicians, Heretics, Atheists, children, and as Platina saith
of John 22. Etsi vir literatus, multa stoliditatem et
laevitatem prae se ferentia egit, stolidi et socordis vir
ingenii, a scholar sufficient, yet many things he did
foolishly, lightly. I can say no more than in particular, but
in general terms to the rest, they are all mad, their wits
are evaporated, and as Ariosto feigns 1. 34. kept in jars
above the moon.

"Some lose their wits with love, some with ambition,
Some following Lords and men of high condition.
Some in fair jewels rich and costly set,
Others in Poetry their wits forget,
Another thinks to be an Alchemist,
Till all be spent, and that his number's mist."

Convicted fools they are, madmen upon record; and I am afraid
past cure many of them, crepunt inguina, the symptoms are
manifest, they are all of Gotam parish:

"Quum furor haud dubius, quum sit manifesta phrenesis,"
(Since madness is indisputable, since frenzy is obvious.)

what remains then but to send for Lorarios, those officers to
carry them all together for company to Bedlam, and set
Rabelais to be their physician.

If any man shall ask in the meantime, who I am that so boldly
censure ethers, tu nullane habes vitia? have I no faults?
Yes, more than thou hast, whatsoever thou art. Nos numerus
sumus, I confess it again, I am as foolish, as mad as any
one.

"Insanus vobis video; non deprecor ipse,
Quo minus insanus," --

I do not deny it, demens do populo dematur. My comfort is, I
have more fellows, and those of excellent note. And though I
be not so right or so discreet as I should be, yet not so
mad, so bad neither, as thou perhaps takest me to be.

To conclude, this being granted, that all the world is
melancholy, or mad, doats, and every member of it, I have
ended my task, and sufficiently illustrated that which I took
upon me to demonstrate at first. At this present I have no
more to say; His sanam mentem Democritus, I can but wish
myself and them a good physician, and all of us a better
mind.

And although for the abovenamed reasons, I had a just cause
to undertake this subject, to point at these particular
species of dotage, that so men might acknowledge their
imperfections, and seek to reform what is amiss; yet I have a
mere serious intent at this time; and to omit all impertinent
digressions, to say no more of such as are improperly
melancholy, or metaphorically mad, lightly mad, or in
disposition, as stupid, angry, drunken, silly, sottish,
sullen, proud, vain-glorious, ridiculous, beastly, peevish,
obstinate, impudent, extravagant, dry, doting, dull,
desperate, harebrain, &c., mad, frantic, foolish,
heteroclites, which no new  hospital can hold, no physic
help; my purpose and endeavour is, in the following discourse
to anatomize this humour of melancholy, through all its parts
and species, as it is an habit, or an ordinary disease, and
that philosophically, medicinally, to show the causes,
symptoms, and several cures of it, that it may be the better
avoided. Moved thereunto for the generality of it, and to do
good, it being a disease so frequent, as Mercurialis
observes, "in these our days; so often happening," saith
Laurentius; "in our miserable times," as few there are that
feel not the smart of it. Of the same mind is Aelian
Montalius, Melancthon, and others; Julius Caesar Claudinus
calls it the "fountain of all other diseases, and so common
in this crazed age of ours, that scarce one in a thousand is
free from it, and that splenetic hypochondriacal wind
especially, which proceeds from the spleen and short ribs.
Being then a disease so grievous, so common, I know not
wherein to do a more general service, and spend my time
better, than to prescribe means how to prevent and cure so
universal a malady, an epidemical disease, that so often, so
much crucifies the body and mind.

If I have overshot myself in this which hath been hitherto
said, or that it is, which I am sure some will object, too
fantastical, "too light and comical for a Divine, too
satirical for one of my profession;" I will presume to answer
with Erasmus, in like case, 'tis not I, but Democritus,
Democritus dixit: you must consider what it is to speak in
one's own or another's person, an assumed habit and name; a
difference betwixt him that affects or acts a prince's, a
philosopher's, a magistrate's, a fool's part, and him that is
so indeed; and what liberty those old satirists have had; it
is a cento collected from others; not I, but they that say
it.

"Dixero si quid forte jocosius, hoc mihi juris
Cum venia dabis."--
Yet some indulgence I may justly claim,
If too familiar with another's fame.


Take heed, you mistake me not. If I do a little forget
myself, I hope you will pardon it. And to say truth, why
should any man be offended, or take exceptions at it?

"Licuit, semperque licebit,
Parcere personis, dicere de vitiis."
It lawful was of old, and still will be,
To speak of vice, but let the name go free.

I hate their vices, not their persons. If any be displeased,
or take aught unto himself, let him not expostulate or cavil
with him that said it (so did Erasmus excuse himself to
Dorpius, si parva licet componere magnis) and so do I; "but
let him be angry with himself that so betrayed and opened his
own faults in applying it to himself:" if he be guilty and
deserve it, let him amend, whoever he is and not be angry.
"he that hateth correction is a fool," Prov. xii. 1. If he be
not guilty, it concerns him not; it is not my freeness of
speech, but a guilty conscience, a galled back of his own
that makes him wince.

"Suspicione si quis errabit suo,
Et rapiet ad se, quod erit commune omnium,
Stulte nudabit animi conscientiam."
("If any one shall err through his own suspicion, and shall
apply to himself what is common to all, he will foolishly
betray a consciousness of guilt")

I deny not this which I have said savours a little of
Democritus; Quamvis ridentem dicere verum quid vetat; one may
speak in jest, and yet speak truth. It is somewhat tart, I
grant it; acriora orexim excitant embammata, as he said,
sharp sauces increase appetite, nec cibus ipse juvat morsu
frandatus aceti. Object then and cavil what thou wilt, I ward
all with Democritus's buckler, his medicine shall salve it;
strike where thou wilt, and when: Democritus dixit,
Democritus will answer it. It was written by an idle fellow,
at idle times, about our Saturnalian or Dyonisian feasts,
when as he said, nullum libertati periculum est, servants in
old Rome had liberty to say and do what them list. When our
countrymen sacrificed to their goddess Vacuna, and sat
tippling by their Vacunal fires, I writ this, and published
this ??t?? e?e?e? [oytis elegen], it is neminis nihil. The
time, places persons, and all circumstances apologise for me,
and why may I not then be idle with others? speak my mind
freely? If you deny me this liberty, upon these presumptions
I will take it: I say again, I will take it.

"Si quis est qui dictum in se inclementius
Existimavit esse, sic existimet."

If any man take exceptions, let him turn the buckle of his
girdle, I care not. I owe thee nothing (Reader), I look for
no favour at thy hands, I am independent, I fear not.

No, I recant, I will not, I care, I fear, I confess my fault,
acknowledge a great offence,

"--- motos praestat componere fluctus."
(--- let's first assuage the troubled waves.)

I have overshot myself; I have spoken foolishly, rashly,
unadvisedly, absurdly, I have anatomized mine own folly. And
now methinks upon a sudden I am awaked as it were out of a
dream; I have had a raving fit, a fantastical fit, ranged up
and down, in and out, I have insulted over the most kind of
men, abused some, offended others, wronged myself; and now
being recovered, and perceiving mine error, cry with Orlando,
Solvite me, pardon (o boni) that which is past, and I will
make you amends in that which is to come; I promise you a
more sober discourse in my following treatise.

If through weakness, folly, passion, discontent, ignorance, I
have said amiss, let it be forgotten and forgiven. I
acknowledge that oft Tacitus to be true, Asperae facetiae ubi
nimis ex vero traxere, acrem sui memoriam relinquunt, a
bitter jest leaves a sting behind it: and as an honourable
man observes, "They fear a satirist's wit, he their
memories." I may justly suspect the worst; and though I hope
I have wronged no man, yet in Medea's words I will crave
pardon.

--- Illud jam voce extrema peto,
Ne si qua noster dubius effudit dolor,
Maneant in animo verba, sed melior tibi
Memoria nostri subeat, hac irae data
Obliterentur --- "
And in my last words this I do desire,
That what in passion I have said, or ire,
May be forgotten, and a better mind
Be had of us, hereafter as you find.

I earnestly request every private man, as Scaliger did Cardan
not to take offence. I will conclude in his lines, Si me
cognitum haberes, non solum donares nobis has facetias
nostras, sed etiam indignum duceres, tam humanum animum, lene
ingenium, vel minimam suspicionem deprecari oportere. If thou
knewest my modesty and simplicity, thou wouldst easily pardon
and forgive what is here amiss, or by thee misconceived. If
hereafter anatomizing this surly humour, my hand slip, as an
unskilful prentice I lance too deep, and cut through skin and
all at unawares, make it smart, or cut awry, pardon a rude
hand, an unskilful knife, 'tis a most difficult thing to keep
an even tone, a perpetual tenor, and not sometimes to lash
out; difficile est Satyram non scribere, there be so many
objects to divert, inward perturbations to molest, and the
very best may sometimes err; aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus
(sometimes that excellent Homer takes a nap), it is
impossible not in so much to overshoot; -- opere in longo fas
est obrepere somnum. But what needs all this? I hope there
will no such cause of offence be given; if there be, "Nemo
aliquid recognoscit, nos mentimur omnia" ("Let not anyone
take all these to himself, they are all fictions"). I'll deny
all (my last refuge), recant all, renounce all I have said,
if any man except, and with as much facility excuse, as he
can accuse; but I presume of thy good favour, and gracious
acceptance (gentle reader). Out of an assured hope and
confidence thereof, I will begin.



TO THE READER AT LEISURE

WHOEVER you may be, I caution you against rashly
defaming the author of this work, or cavilling in jest
against him. Nay, do not silently reproach him in consequence
of others' censure, nor employ your wit in foolish
disapproval, or false accusation. For, should Democritus
Junior prove to be what he professes, even a kinsman of his
older namesake, or be ever so little of the same kidney, it
is all over with you: he will become both accuser and judge
of you in your spleen, will dissipate you in jests, pulverise
you into salt, and sacrifice you, I can promise you, to the
god of Mirth.

I further advise you, not to asperse, or calumniate, or
slander, Democritus Junior, who possibly does not think ill
of you, lest you may hear from some discreet friend, the same
remark the people of Abdera did from Hippocrates, of their
meritorious and popular fellow-citizen, whom they had looked
on as a madman; "It is not that you, Democritus, that art
wise, but that the people of Abdera are fools and madmen?
"You have yourself an Abderitian soul;" and having just given
you, gentle reader, these few words of admonition, farewell.



PROEM

HERACLITE fleas, misero sic convenit saevo,
 Nil nisi turpe vides, nil nisi triste vides.
Ride etiam, quantumque lubet, Democrite ride,
 Non nisi vana vides, non nisi stulta vides.
Is fletu, hic risu modo gaudeat, unus utrique
 Sit licet usque labor, sit licet usque dolor.
Nunc opus est (nam totus eheu jam desipit orbis)
 Mille Heraclitis, milleque Democritis.
Nunc opus est (tanta est insania) transeat omnis
Mundus in Anticyras, gramen in Helleborum.

Weep, O Heraclitus, it suits the age,
 Unless you see nothing base, nothing sad.
Laugh, O Democritus, as much as you please,
 Unless you see nothing either vain or foolish.
Let one rejoice in smiles, the other in tears;
 Let the same labour or pain be the office of both.
Now (for alas! how foolish the world has become),
 A thousand Heraclitus', a thousand Democritus' are required,
Now (so much does madness prevail), all the world must be
 Sent to Anticyra, to graze on Hellebore.



THE SYNOPSIS OF THE FIRST PARTITION

In diseases consider Sect. I Memb. I
 * Their Causes Subs. I
    * Impulsive;
       * Sin, Concupiscence, &c
    * Instrumental;
       * Intemperance, all second causes, &c.
 * Definition, Member, Division. Subs. 2
    * Of the body 300, which are
       * Epidemical, as Plague, Plica, &c.
       * Particular, as gout, dropsy, etc.
    * Of the head or mind. Subs. 3
       * In disposition; as all perturbations, evil
affection, &c
       * Habits, as Subs. 4
          * Dotage
          * Frenzy
          * Madness
          * Ecstasy
          * Lycanthropia
          * Choreus sancti Viti
          * Hydrophobia
          * Possession or obsession of devils
          * Melancholy. See W

W: Melancholy: in which consider
 * Its Equivocations, in Disposition, Improper, &c. Subsect.
5
 * Memb. 2. To its explication, a digression of anatomy, in
which observe
   parts of
   Subs. 1
    * Body hath parts Subs. 2
       * contained, as
          * Humours, 4. Blood, phlegm, &c.
          * Spirits; vital, natural, animal.
       * containing
          * Similar; spermatical, or flesh, bones, nerves,
&c. Subs. 3
          * Dissimilar; brain, heart, liver, &c. Subs. 4
    * Soul and its faculties, as
       * Vegetal. Subs. 5
       * Sensible. Subs. 6, 7, 8
       * Rational. Subs. 9, 10, 11
 * Memb 3.
 * Its definition, name, difference, Subs. 1
 * The part and parties affected, affectation, &c. Subs. 2
 * The matter of melancholy, natural, unnatural, &c. Subs. 3
 * Species, or kinds, Subs. 4, which are
    * Proper to parts, as
       * Of the head alone, Hypochondriacal, or windy
melancholy.
       * Of the whole body;
       * with their several causes, symptoms, prognostics,
    * Indefinite, as love-melancholy, the subject of the
third Partition.
 * Its Causes in general. Sect 2. A.
 * Its Symptoms or signs Sect. 3 B.
 * Its Prognostics or indications Sect 4. C
 * Its Cures; the subject of the second Partition

A: Sect. 2 Causes of melancholy are either
 * General, as Memb. 1
    * Supernatural
       * As from God immediately, or by second causes. Subs.
1
       * Or from the devil immediately, with a digression on
the nature
         of spirits and devils. Subs. 2
       * Or mediately, by magicians, witches. Subs. 3
    * Natural
       * Primary, as stars, proved by aphorisms, signs from
physiognomy,
         metoposcopy, chiromancy Subs. 4
       * Secondary, as
          * Congenite, Inward from
             * Old age, temperament, Subs. 5
             * Parents, it being an hereditary disease, Subs.
6
          * Outward, or adventitious, which are
             * Evident, outward, remote, adventitious, as
                * Necessary, see Y
                * Not Necessary, as Memb. 4 Sect. 2
                   * Nurses, Subs. 1
                   * Education, Subs. 2
                   * Terrors, affrights, Subs. 3
                   * Scoffs, calumnies, bitter jests, Subs. 4
                   * Loss of liberty, servitude, 
imprisonment, Subs. 5
                   * Poverty and want, Subs. 6
                   * A heap of other accidents, death of
friends, loss
                     &c. Subs. 7
             * Contingent, inward, antecedent, nearest. Memb.
5 Sect. 2
                * In which the body works on the mind, and
this malady is
                  caused by precedent diseases; as agues,
pox, &c. or
                  temperature innate, Subs. 1
                * Or by particular parts distempered, as
brain, heart,
                  spleen, liver, mesentery, pylorus, stomach,
&c. Subs. 2
 * Particular to the three species. See X.

X: Particular Causes. Sect. 2 Memb. 5
 * Of head melancholy are, Subs. 3
    * Inward
       * Innate humour, or from distemperature adust.
       * A hot brain, corrupted blood in the brain.
       * Excess of venery, or defect.
       * Agues, or some precedent disease.
       * Fumes arising from the stomach, &c.
    * Outward
       * Heat of the sun immoderate.
       * A blow on the head.
       * Overmuch use of hot wines, garlic, onions, hot
baths, overmuch
         walking, &c.
       * Idleness, solitariness, or overmuch study, vehement
labour, &c.
       * Passions, perturbations, &c.
 * Of hypochondriacal, or windy melancholy, are Sect. 4
    * Inward
       * Default of spleen, belly, bowels, stomach,
mesentery, miseraic
         veins, liver, &c.
       * Months or hemorrhoids stopped, or any other ordinary
evacuation
    * Outward
       * Those six non-natural things abused.
 * Over all the body are, Sect. 5
    * Inward
       * Liver distempered, over-hot, apt to engender
melancholy,
         temperature innate.
    * Outward
       * Bad diet, suppression of hemorrhoids, &c., and such
evacuations,
         passions, cares, &c., those six non-natural things
abused.

Y: Necessary causes, as those six non-natural things, which
are Sect. 2
Memb. 2
 * Diet offending in
    * Substance Subs. 1
       * Bread; coarse and black, &c.
       * Drink; thick, thin, sour, &c.
       * Water unclean, milk, oil, vinegar, wine, spices, &c.
       * Flesh
          * Parts; heads, feet, entrails, fat, bacon, blood,
&c.
          * Kinds
             * Beef, pork, venison, hares, goats, pigeons,
peacocks,
               fen-fowl, &c.
       * Herbs, Fish, &c.
          * Of fish; all shell-fish, hard and slimy fish, &c.
          * Of herbs; pulse, cabbage, melons, garlick,
onions, &c.
          * All roots, raw fruits, hard and windy meats.
    * Quality, as in
       * Preparing, dressing, sharp sauces, salt meats,
indurate, soused,
         fried, broiled or made dishes, &c.
    * Quantity
       * Disorder in eating, immoderate eating, or at
unseasonable times,
         &c. Subs. 2
       * Custom; delight, appetite, altered, &c. Subs. 3
 * Retention and evacuation, Subs. 4
    * Costiveness, hot baths, sweating, issues stopped, Venus
in excess,
      or in defect, phlebotomy, purging, &c.
 * Air, hot, cold, tempestuous, dark, thick, foggy, moorish,
&c Subs. 5
 * Exercise, Subs. 6
    * Unseasonable, excessive, or defective, of body or mind,
      solitariness, idleness, a life out of action, &c.
 * Sleep and waking, unseasonable, inordinate, overmuch,
overlittle, &c.
   Subs. 7
 * Memb. 3 Sect 2.
 * Passions and perturbations of the mind. Subs. 1.
   With a digression of the force of the imagination, Subs.
2,
   And division of the passions into, Subs. 3
    * Irascible
       * Sorrow, cause and symptom, Subs. 4
       * Fear, cause and symptom, Subs. 5
       * Shame, repulse, disgrace, &c. Subs. 6
       * Envy and malice, Subs. 7
       * Emulation, hatred, faction, desire of revenge, Subs.
8
       * Anger a cause, Subs. 9
       * Discontents, cares, miseries, &c. Subs. 10
    * Concupiscible
       * Vehement desire, ambition, Subs. 11
       * Covetousness, f??a?????a? [philargyrian], Subs. 12
       * Love of pleasures, gaming in excess,  &c. Subs. 13
       * Desire of praise, pride, vainglory, &c. Subs. 14
       * Love of learning, study in excess, with a digression
on the
         misery of scholars, and why the muses are
melancholy, Subs. 15

B. Symptoms of melancholy are either Sect. 3
 * General, as of Memb. 1
    * Body, as ill digestion, crudity, wind, dry brains, hard
belly,
      thick blood, much waking, heaviness and palpitation of
heart,
      leaping to many places, &c., Subs. 1
    * Mind
       * Common to all or most
          * Fear and sorrow without a just cause, suspicion,
jealousy,
            discontent, solitariness, irksomeness, continual
cogitation,
            restless thoughts, vain imaginations, &c. Subs. 2
       * Particular to private persons, according to Subs. 3,
4
          * Celestial influences, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
&c., parts of
            the body, heart, brain, liver, spleen, stomach,
&c.
          * Humours
             * Sanguine are merry still laughing, pleasant,
meditating on
               plays, women, music, &c.
             * Phlegmatic, slothful, dull, heavy, &c.
             * Choleric, furious, impatient, subject to see
and hear
               strange apparitions, &c.
             * Black, solitary, sad; they think they are
bewitched, dead,
          * Or mixed of these four humours adust, or not
adust,
            infinitely varied, &c.
          * Their several customs, conditions, inclinations,
discipline,
             * Ambitious, thinks himself a king, a lord
             * Covetous, runs on his money.
             * Lascivious, on his mistress
             * Religious, hath revelations, visions, is a
prophet, or
               troubled in mind
             * A scholar, on his book, &c.
          * Continuance in time as the humour is intended or
remitted,
             * Pleasant at first, hardly discerned;
afterwards harsh and
               intolerable, if inveterate.
             * Hence some make three degrees
                * 1. Falsa Cogitato
                * 2. Cogitata loqui
                * 3. Exequi loquutum
             * By fits, or continuate, as the object varies,
pleasing or
               displeasing
 * Simple, as it is mixed with other diseases, apoplexies,
gout, caninus
   appetitus, &c. so the symptoms are various.

Z: Particular symptoms to the three distinct species Sect. 3
Memb. 2
 * Head melancholy Subs. 1
    * In body
       * Headache, binding and heaviness, vertigo, lightness,
singing of
         the ears, much waking, fixed eyes, high colour, red
eyes, hard
         belly, dry body; no great sign of melancholy in the
other parts.
    * In mind
       * Continual fear, sorrow, suspicion, discontent,
superfluous
         cares, solicitude, anxiety, perpetual cogitaton of
such toys,
         they are possessed with, thoughts like dreams, &c.
 * Hypochondriacal, or windy melancholy, Subs. 2
    * In body
       * Wind, rumbling in the guts, belly-ache, heat in the
bowels,
         convulsions, crudities, short wind, sour and sharp
belchings,
         cold sweat, pain in the left side, suffocation,
palpitation,
         heaviness of the heart, singing in the ears, much
spittle, and
         moist, &c.
    * In mind
       * Fearful, sad, suspicious, discontent, anxiety, &c.,
Lascivious by
         reason of much wind, troublesome dreams, affected by
fits, &c.
 * Over all the body Subs. 3
    * In body
       * Black, most parts lean, broad veins, gross, thick
blood, their
         hemorrhoids commonly stopped, &c.
    * In mind
       * Fearful, sad, solitary, hate light, averse from
company, fearful
         dreams, &c.
 * Symptoms of nuns', maids' and widows' melancholy, in body
and mind,
 * A reason of these symptoms Memb. 3
    * Why they are so fearful, sad, suspicious without a
cause, why
      solitary, why melancholy men are witty, why they
suppose they hear
      and see strange voices, visions, apparitions.
    * Why they prophesy, and speak strange languages, whence
comes their
      crudity, rambling, convulsion, cold sweat, heaviness of
heart,
      palpitation, cardiaca, fearful dreams, much waking,
prodigious
      fantasies

C. Prognostics of melancholy Sect. 4
 * Tending to good, as
    * Morphew, scabs, itch, breaking out, &c.
    * Black jaundice
    * If the hemorrhoids voluntarily open
    * If varices appear
 * Tending to evil, as
    * Leanness, dryness, hollow-eyed, &c.
    * Inveterate melancholy is incurable
    * If cold, it degenerates often into epilepsy, apoplexy,
dotage, or
      into blindness.
    * If hot, into madness, despair and violent death.
 * Corollaries and questions.
    * The grievousness of this above all other diseases
    * The diseases of the mind are more grievous than those
of the body
    * Whether it be lawful, in this case of melancholy, for a
man to
      offer violence to himself. Neg.
    * How a melancholy or mad man offering violence to
himself, is to be
      censured



THE FIRST PARTITION.


THE FIRST SECTION, MEMBER, SUBSECTION.

Man's Excellency, Fall, Miseries, Infirmities; The causes of
them.

Man's Excellency.] MAN, the most excellent and noble
creature of the world, "the principal and mighty work of God,
wonder of nature," as Zoroaster calls him; audacis naturae
miraculum, "the marvel of marvels," as Plato; the "abridgment
and epitome of the world," as Pliny; Microcosmus, a little
world, a model of the world, sovereign lord of the earth,
viceroy of the world, sole commander and governor of all the
creatures in it; to whose empire they are subject in
particular, and yield obedience; far surpassing all the rest,
not in body only, but in soul; Imaginis Imago, created to
God's own image, to that immortal and incorporeal substance,
with all the faculties and powers belonging unto it; was at
first pure, divine, perfect, happy, "created after God in
true holiness and righteousness;" Deo congruens, free from
all manner of infirmities, and put in Paradise to know God,
to praise and glorify him, to do his will, Ut diis consimiles
parturiat deos (as an old poet saith) to propagate the
church.

Man's Fall and Misery.] But this most noble creature, Heu
tristis, et lachrymosa commutatio (one exclaims) O pitiful
change! is fallen from that he was, and forfeited his estate,
become miserabilis homuncio, a cast-away, a caitiff, one of
the most miserable creatures of the world, if he be
considered in his own nature, an unregenerate man, and so
much obscured by his fall that (some few reliques excepted)
he is inferior to a beast, "Man in honour that uuderstandeth
not, is like unto beasts that perish," so David esteems him:
a monster by stupend metamorphosis, a fox, a dog, a hog, what
not? Quantum mutatus ab illo? How much altered from that he
was; before blessed and happy, now miserible and accursed;
"He must eat his meat in sorrow," subject to death and all
manner of infirmities, all kind of calamities.

A Description of Melancholy.] "Great travail is created for
all men, and an heavy yoke on the sons of Adam, from the day
that they go out of their mother's womb, unto that day they
return to the mother of all things. Namely, their thoughts,
and fear of their hearts, and their imagination of things
they wait for, and the day of death. From him that sitteth in
the glorious throne, to him that sitteth beneath in the earth
and ashes; from him that is clothed in blue silk and weareth
a crown, to him that is clothed in simple linen. Wrath, envy,
trouble, and unquietness, and fear of death, and rigour, and
strife, and such things come to both man and beast, but
sevenfold to the ungodly." All this befalls him in this life,
and peradventure eternal misery in the life to come.

Impulsive Cause of Man's Misery and Infirmities.] The
impulsive cause of these miseries in Man, this privation of
destruction of God's image, the cause of death and diseases,
of all temporal and eternal punishments, was the sin of our
first parent Adam, eating of the forbidden fruit, by the
devil's instigation and allurement. His disobedience, pride,
ambition, intemperance, incredulity, curiosity; from whence
proceeded original sin, and that general corruption of
mankind, as from a fountain flowed all bad inclinations and
actual transgressions which cause our several calamities
inflicted upon us for our sins. And this belike is that which
our fabulous poets have shadowed unto us in the tale of
Pandora's box, which being opened through her curiosity,
filled the world full of all manner of diseases. It is not
curiosity alone, but those other crying sins of ours, which
pull these several plagues and miseries upon our heads. For
Ubi peccatum, ibi procella, as Chrysostom well observes.
"Fools by reason of their transgression, and because of their
iniquities, are afflicted. Fear cometh like sudden
desolation, and destruction like a whirlwind, affliction and
anguish, "because they did not fear God, "Are you shaken with
wars?" as Cyprian well urgeth to Demetrius, "are you molested
with dearth and famine? is your health crushed with raging
diseases? is mankind generally tormented with epidemical
maladies? 'tis all for your sins," Hag. i. 9, 10; Amos i.;
Jer. vii. God is angry, punisheth and threateneth, because of
their obstinacy and stubbornness, they will not turn unto
him. "If the earth be barren then for want of rain, if dry
and squalid, it yield no fruit, if your fountains be dried
up, your wine, corn, and oil blasted, if the air be
corrupted, and men troubled with diseases, 'tis by reason of
their sins:" which like the blood of Abel cry loud to heaven
for vengeance, Lam. v. 15. "That we have sinned, therefore
our hearts are heavy," Isa. lix. 11, 12. "We roar like bears,
and mourn like doves, and want health, &c. for our sins and
trespasses." But this we cannot endure to hear or to take
notice of; Jer. ii. 30. "We are smitten in vain and receive
no correction;" and cap. v. 3. "Thou hast stricken them, but
they have not sorrowed; they have refused to receive
correction; they have not returned. Pestilence he hath sent,
but they have not turned to him," Amos iv. Herod could not
abide John Baptist, nor Domitian endure Apollonius to tell
the causes of the plague at Ephesus, his injustice, incest,
adultery, and the like.

To punish therefore this blindness and obstinacy of ours as a
concomitant cause and principal agent, is God's just judgment
in bringing these calamities upon us, to chastise us, I say,
for our sins, and to satisfy God's wrath. For the law
requires obedience or punishment, as you may read at large,
Deut. xxviii. 15. "If they will not obey the Lord, and keep
his commandments and ordinances, then all these curses shall
come upon them. Cursed in the town and in the field. &c.
Cursed in the fruit of the body, &c. The Lord shall send thee
trouble and shame, because of thy wickedness." And a little
after, "The Lord shall smite thee with the botch of Egypt,
and with emrods, and scab, and itch, and thou canst not be
healed. With madness, blindness, and astonishing of heart."
This Paul seconds, Rom. ii. 9, "Tribulation and anguish on
the soul of every man that doth evil." Or else these
chastisements are inflicted upon us for our humiliation, to
exercise and try our patience here in this life, to bring us
home, to make us to know God ourselves, to inform and teach
us wisdom. "Therefore is my people gone into captivity,
because they had no knowledge; therefore is the wrath of the
Lord kindled against his people, and he hath stretched out
his hand upon them." He is desirous of our salvation. Nostrae
salutis avidus, saith Lemnius, and for that cause pulls us by
the ear many times, to put us in mind of our duties: "That
they which erred might have understanding, (as Isaiah speaks
xxix. 24) and so to be reformed. I am afflicted, and at the
point of death," so David confesseth of himself; Psalm
lxxxviii. v. 15, v. 9. "Mine eyes are sorrowful through mine
affliction:" and that made him turn unto God. Great Alexander
in the midst of all his prosperity, by a company of parasites
deified, and now made a god, when he saw one of his wounds
bleed, remembered that he was but a man, and remitted of his
pride. In morbo recolligit se animus, as Pliny well
perceived; "In sickness the mind reflects upon itself; with
judgment surveys itself; and abhors its former courses;"
insomuch that he concludes to his friend Marius, "that it
were the period of all philosophy, if we could so continue,
sound, or perform but a part of that which we promised to do,
being sick." Whoso is wise then, will consider these things,
as David did (Psal. cxliv., verse last); and whatsoever
fortune befall him, make use of it. If he be in sorrow, need,
sickness, or any other adversity, seriously to recount with
himself; why this or that malady, misery, this or that
incurable disease is inflicted upon him; it may be for his
good, sic expedit, as Peter said of his daughter's ague.
Bodily sickness is for his soul's health, periisset nisi
periisset, had he not been visited, he had utterly perished;
for "the Lord correcteth him whom he loveth, even as a father
doth his child in whom he delighteth." If he be safe and
sound on the other side, and free from all manner of
infirmity; et cui

"Gratia, forma, valetudo contingat abunde
Et mundus victus, non deficiente crumena."
"And that he have grace, beauty, favour, health,
A cleanly diet, and abound in wealth."

Yet in the midst of his prosperity, let him remember that
caveat of Moses, "Beware that he do not forget the Lord his
God;" that he be not puffed up, but acknowledge them to be
his good gifts and benefits, and "the more he hath, to be
more thankful," (as Agapetianus adviseth) and use them
aright.

Instrumental Causes of our Infirmities.] Now the instrumental
causes of these our infirmities, are as diverse as the
infirmities themselves; stars, heavens, elements, &c. And all
those creatures which God hath made, are armed against
sinners. They were indeed once good in themselves, and that
they are now many of them pernicious unto us, is not in their
nature, but our corruption, which hath caused it. For from
the fall of our first parent Adam, they have been changed,
the earth accursed, the influence of stars altered, the four
elements, beasts, birds, plants, are now ready to offend us.
"The principal things for the use of man, are water, fire,
iron, salt, meal, wheat, honey, milk, oil, wine, clothing,
good to the godly, to the sinners turned to evil," Ecclus.
xxxix. 26. "Fire, and hail, and famine, and dearth, all these
are created for vengeance," Ecclus. xxxix. 29. The heavens
threaten us with their comets, stars, planets, with their
great conjunctions, eclipses, oppositions, quartiles, and
such unfriendly aspects. The air with his meteors, thunder
and lightning, intemperate heat and cold, mighty winds,
tempests, unseasonable weather; from which proceed dearth,
famine, plague, and all sorts of epidemical diseases,
consuming infinite myriads of men. At Cairo in Egypt, every
third year, (as it is related by Boterus, and others) 300,000
die of the plague; and 200,000, in Constantinople, every
fifth or seventh at the utmost. How doth the earth terrify
and oppress us with terrible earthquakes, which are most
frequent in China, Japan, and those eastern climes,
swallowing up sometimes six cities at once? How doth the
water rage with his inundations, irruptions, flinging down
towns, cities, villages, bridges, &c, besides shipwrecks;
whole islands are sometimes suddenly overwhelmed with all
their inhabitants in Holland, and many parts of the continent
drowned, as the lake Erne in Ireland? Nihilque praeter arcium
cadavera patenti cernimus freto. In the fens of Friesland,
1230, by reason of tempests, the sea drowned multa hominum
millia, et jumenta sine numero, (and we percieve nothing,
except the dead bodies of cities in the open sea) all the
country almost, men aud cattle in it. How doth the fire rage,
that merciless element, consuming in an instant whole cities?
What town of any antiquity or note hath not been once, again
and again, by the fury of this merciless element, defaced,
ruinated, and left desolate? In a word,

"Ignis pepercit, unda mergit, aeris
Vis pestilentis aequori ereptum necat,
Bello superstes, tabidus morbo perit"
"Whom fire spares, sea doth drown; whom sea,
Pestilent air doth send to clay;
Whom war 'scapes, sickness takes away."


To descend to more particulars, how many creatures are at
deadly feud with men? Lions, wolves, bears, &c., Some with
hoofs, horns, tusks, teeth, nails: How many noxious serpents
and venomous creatures, ready to offend us with stings,
breath, sight, or quite kill us? How many pernicious fishes,
plants, gums, fruits, seeds, flowers, &c., could I reckon up
on a sudden, which by their very smell many of them, touch,
taste, cause some grievous malady, if not death itself? Some
make mention of a thousand several poisons: but these are but
trifles in respect. The greatest enemy to man, is man, who by
the devil's instigation is still ready to do mischief; his
own executioner, a wolf, a devil to himself, and others. We
are all brethren in Christ, or at least should be, members of
one body, servants of one Lord, and yet no fiend can so
torment, insult over, tyrannize, vex, as one man doth
another. Let me not fall therefore (saith David, when wars,
plague, famine were offered) into the hands of men, merciless
and wicked men:
Vix sunt homines hoc nomine digni,
Quamque lupi, saevae plus feritatis habent."


We can most part foresee these epidemical diseases, and
likely avoid them; Dearths, tempests, plagues, our
astrologers foretel us; Earthquakes, inundations, ruins of
houses, consuming fires, come by little and little, or make
some noise beforehand; but the knaveries, impostures,
injuries and villanies of men no art can avoid. We can keep
our professed enemies from our cities, by gates, walls, and
towers, defend ourselves from thieves and robbers by
watchfulness and weapons; but this malice of men, and their
pernicious endeavours, no caution can divert, no vigilancy
foresee, we have so many secret plots and devices to mischief
one another.

Sometimes by the devil's help as magicians, witches:
sometimes by impostures, mixtures, poisons, stratagems,
single combats, wars, we hack and hew as if we were ad
internecionem nati, like Cadmus' soldiers born to consume one
another. 'Tis an ordinary thing to read of a hundred and two
hundred thousand men slain in a battle. Besides all manner of
tortures, brazen bulls, racks, wheels, strapadoes, guns,
engines, &c. Ad unum corpus humanum supplicia plura, quam
membra: We have invented more torturing instruments, than
there be several members in a man's body, as Cyprian well
observes. To come nearer yet, our own parents by their
offences, indiscretion and intemperance, are our mortal
enemies. "The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the
children's teeth are set on edge." They cause our grief many
times, and put upon us hereditary diseases, inevitable
infirmities: they torment us, and we are ready to injure our
posterity;

-- "mox daturi progeniem vitiosiorem."
"And yet with crimes to us unknown,
Our sons shall mark the coming age their own."

and the latter end of the world, as Paul foretold, is still
like to be the worst. We are thus bad by nature, bad by kind,
but far worse by art, every man the greatest enemy unto
himself. We study many times to undo ourselves, abusing those
good gifts which God hath bestowed upon us, health, wealth, 
strength, wit, learning, art, memory to our own destruction,
Perditio tua ex te. As Judas Maccabeus killed Apollonius with
his own weapons, we arm ourselves to our own overthrows; and
use reason, art, judgment, all that should help us, as so
many instruments to undo us. Hector gave Ajax a sword, which
so long as he fought against enemies, served for his help and
defence; but after he began to hurt harmless creatures with
it, turned to his own hurtless bowels. Those excellent means
God hath bestowed on us, well employed, cannot but much avail
us; but if otherwise perverted, they ruin and confound us:
and so by reason of our indiscretion and weakness they
commonly do, we have too many instances. This St. Austin
acknowledgeth of himself in his humble confessions,
"promptness of wit, memory, eloquence, they were God's good
gifts, but he did not use them to his glory." If you will
particularly know how, and by what means, consult physicians,
and they will tell you, that it is in offending in some of
those six non-natural things, of which I shall dilate more at
large; they are the causes of our infirmities, our
surfeiting, and drunkenness, our immoderate insatiable lust,
and prodigious riot. Plures crapula, quam gladius, is a true
saying, the board consumes more than the sword. Our
intemperance it is, that pulls so many several incurable
diseases upon our heads, that hastens old age, perverts our
temperature, and brings upon us sudden death. And last of
all, that which crucifies us most, is our own folly, madness,
(quos Jupiter perdit, dementat; by subtraction of his
assisting grace God permits it) weakness, want of government,
our facility and proneness in yielding to several lusts, in
giving way to every passion and perturbation of the mind: by
which means we metamorphose ourselves and degenerate into
beasts. All which that prince of poets observed of Agamemnon,
that when he was well pleased, and could moderate his
passion, he was -- os oculosque Jove par: like Jupiter in
feature, Mars in valour. Pallas in wisdom, another god; but
when he became angry, he was a lion, a tiger, a dog, &c.,
there appeared no sign or likeness of Jupiter in him; so we,
as long as we are ruled by reason, correct our inordinate
appetite, and conform ourselves to God's word, are as so many
saints: but if we give reins to lust, anger, ambition, pride,
and follow our own way; we degenerate into beasts, transform
ourselves, overthrow our constitutions, provoke God to anger,
and heap upon us this of melancholy, and all kinds of
incurable diseases, as a just and deserved punishment of our
sins.



SUBSECT. II. -- The Definition, Number, Division of Diseases.

WHAT a disease is, almost every physician defines.
Fernelius calleth it an "Affection of the body contrary to
nature." Fuschius and Crato, "an hinderance, hurt, or
alteration of any action of the body, or part of it."
Tholosanus, "a dissolution of that league which is between
body and soul, and perturbation of it; as health the
perfection, and makes to the preservation of it." Labeo in
Agellius, "an ill habit of the body, opposite to nature
hindering the use of, it." Others otherwise, all to this
effect.

Number of Diseases.] How many diseases there are, is a
question not yet determined; Pliny reckons up 300 from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot: elsewhere he
saith, morborurm infinita multitudo, their number is
infinite. Howsoever it was in those times, it boots not; in
our days I am sure the number is much augmented:
-- "macies, et nova febrium
Terris incubat cohors."
-- "Emaciation, and a new cohort of fevers
Broods over the earth."

For besides many epidemical diseases unheard of, and
altogether unknown to Galen and Hippocrates, as scorbutum,
small-pox, plica, sweating sickness, morbus Gallicus, &c., we
have many proper and peculiar almost to every part.

No man free from some Disease or other.] No man amongst us so
sound, of so good a constitution, that hath not some
impediment of body or mind. Quisque suos patimur manes, we
have all our infirmities, first or last, more or less. There
will be peradventure in an age, or one of a thousand, like
Zenophilus the musician in Pliny, that may happily live 105
years without any manner of impediment; a Pollio Romulus,
that can preserve himself "with wine and oil;" a man as
fortunate as Q. Metellus, of whom Valerius so much brags; a
man as healthy as Otto Herwardus, a senator of Augsburg in
Germany, whom Leovitius the astrologer brings in for an
example and instance and certainty in his art; who because he
had the significators in his geniture fortunate, and free
from the hostile aspects of Saturn and Mars, being a very
cold man, "could not remember that ever he was sick."
Paracelsus may brag that he could make a man live 400 years
or more, if he might bring him up from his infancy, and diet
him as he list; and some physicians hold, that there is no
certain period of man's life; but it may still by temperance
and physic be prolonged. We find in the meantime, by common
experience, that no man can escape, but that of Hesiod is
true;

"Th'earth's full of maladies, and full the sea,
Which set upon us both by night and day."


Division of Diseases.] If you require a more exact division
of these ordinary diseases which are incident to men, I refer
you to physicians; they will tell you of acute and chronic,
first and secondary, lethales, salutares, errant, fixed, 
simple, compound, connexed, or consequent, belonging to parts
or the whole, in habit, or in disposition, &c. My division at
this time (as most befitting my purpose) shall be into those
of the body and mind. For them of the body, a brief catalogue
of which Fuschius hath made, Institut. lib. 3, sect. 1, cap.
11. I refer you to the voluminous tomes of Galen, Areteus,
Rhasis, Avicenna, Alexander, Paulus Aetius, Gordonerius: and
these exact Neoterics, Savanarola, Capivaccius, Donatus
Altomarus, Hercules de Saxonia, Mercurialis, Victorius
Faventinus, Wecker, Piso, &c., that have methodically and
elaborately written of them all. Those of the mind and head I
will briefly handle, and apart.



SUBSECT. III. -- Division of the Diseases of the Head.

THESE diseases of the mind, forasmuch as they have
their chief seat and organs in the head, which are commonly
repeated amongst the diseases of the head which are divers,
and vary much according to their site. For in the head, as
there be several parts, so there be divers grievances, which
according to that division of Heurnius (which he takes out of
Arculanus,) are inward or outward (to omit all others which
pertain to eyes and ears, nostrils, gums, teeth, mouth,
palate, tongue, wesel, chops, face, &c.) belonging properly
to the brain, as baldness, falling of hair, furfaire, lice.
&c. Inward belonging to the skins next to the brain, called
dura and pia mater, as all head-aches, &c., or to the
ventricles. caules, kels, tunicles, creeks, and parts of it,
and their passions, as caro, vertigo, incubus, apoplexy,
falling sickness. The diseases of the nerves, cramps, stupor,
convulsions, tremor, palsy: or belonging to the excrements of
the brain. catarrhs, sneezing, rheums, distillations: or else
those that pertain to the substance of the brain itself, in
which are conceived frenzy, lethargy, melancholy, madness,
weak memory, sopor, or Coma Vigilia et vigil Coma. Out of
these again I will single such as properly belong to the
phantasy, or imagination, or reason itself, which Laurentius
calls the diseases of the mind; and Hildesheim, morbos
imaginationis, aut rationis laesae, (diseases of the
imagination, or of injured reason,) which are three or four
in number, phrensy, madness, melancholy, dotage, and their
kinds: as hydrophobia, lycanthropia, Chorus sancti viti,
morbi daemoniaci, (St. Vitus's dance, possession of devils,)
which I will briefly touch and point at, insisting especially
in this of melancholy, as more eminent than the rest, and
that through all his kinds, causes, symptoms, prognostics,
cures: as Lonicerus hath done de apoplexia, and many other of
such particular diseases. Not that I find fault with those
which have written of this subject before; as Jason
Pratensis, Laurentius, Montaltus, T. Bright. &c., they have
done very well in their several kinds and methods; yet that
which one omits, another may haply see; that which one
contracts, another may enlarge. To conclude with Scribanius,
"that which they had neglected, or profunctorily handled, we
may more thoroughly examine; that which is obscurely
delivered in them, may be perspicuously dilated and amplified
by us:" and so made more familiar and easy for every man's
capacity, and the common good, which is the chief end of my
discourse.



SUBSECT. IV. -- Dotage, Phrensy, Madness, Hydrophobia,
Lycanthropia, Chorus sancti Viti, Extasis.


Delirium, Dotage.] DOTAGE, fatuity, or folly, is a common
name to all the fullowing species, as some will have it. 
Laurentius and Altomarus comprehended madness, melancholy,
and the rest under this name, and call it the summum genus of
them all. If it be distinguished from them, it is natural or
ingenite, which comes by some defect of the organs, and over-
much brain, as we see in our common fools; and is for the
most part intended or remitted in particular men, and
thereupon some are wiser than others: or else it is
acquisite, an appendix or symptom of some other disease,
which comes or goes; or if it continue, a sign of melancholy
itself.

Phrensy.] Phrenitis, which the Greeks derive from the word
f??? [phren], is a disease of the mind, with a continual
madness or dotage, which hath an acute fever annexed, or else
an inflammation of the brain, or the membranes or kels of it,
with an acute fever, which causeth madness and dotage. It
differs from melancholy and madness, because their dotage is
without an ague: this continual, with waking, or memory
decayed, &c. Melancholy is most part silent, this clamorous;
and many such like differences are assigned by physicians.

Madness.] Madness, phrensy, and melancholy are confounded by
Celsus and many writers; others leave out phrensy, and make
madness and melancholy but one disease, which Jason Pratensis
especially labours, and that they differ only secundum majus
or minus, in quantity alone; the one being a degree to the
other, and both proceeding from one cause. They differ
intenso et remisso gradu, saith Gordonius, as the humour is
intended or remitted. Of the same mind is Areteus Alexander
Tertullianus, Guianerius, Savanarola, Heurnius; and Galen
himself writes promiscuously of them both by reason of their
affinity: but most of our neoterics do handle them apart,
whom I will follow in this treatise. Madness is therefore
defined to be a vehement dotage; or raving without a fever,
far more violent than melancholy, full of anger and clamour,
horrible looks, actions, gestures, troubling the patients
with far greater vehemency both of body and mind, without all
fear and sorrow, with such impetuous force and boldness, that
sometimes three or four men cannot hold them. Differing only
in this from phrensy, that it is without a fever, and their
memory is most part better. It hath the same causes as the
other, as choler adust, and blood incensed, brains inflamed,
&c.  Fracastrius adds, "a due time, and full age to this
definition, to distinguish it from children, and will have it
confirmed impotency, to separate it from such as accidentally
come and go again, as by taking henbane, nightshade, wine,"
&c. Of this fury there be divers kinds; ecstasy, which is
familiar with some persons, as Cardan saith of himself, he
could be in one when he list; in which the Indian priests
deliver their oracles, and the witches in Lapland, as Olaus
Magnus writeth, 1. 3. cap. 18. Extasi omnia praedicere,
answer all questions in an extasis you will ask; what your 
friends do, where they are, how they fare, &c. The other
species of this fury are enthusiasms, revelations, and
visions, so often mentioned by Gregory and Beda in their
works; obsession or possession of devils, sibylline prophets,
and poetical furies; such as come by eating noxious herbs,
tarantulas stinging, &c., which some reduce to this. The most
known are these, lycanthropia, hydrophobia, chorus sancti
viti.

Lycanthropia.] Lycanthropia, which Avicenna calls Cucubuth,
others Lupinam insaniam, or Wolf-madness, when men run
howling about graves and fields in the night, and will not be
persuaded but that they are wolves, or some such beasts.
Aetius and Paulus call it a kind of melancholy; but I should
rather refer it to madness, as most do. Some make a doubt of
it whether there be any such disease. Donat ab Altomari
saith, that he saw two of them in his time: Wierus tells a
story of such a one at Padua 1541, that would not believe to
the contrary, but that he was a wolf. He hath another
instance of a Spaniard, who thought himself a bear; Forrestus
confirms as much by many examples; one amongst the rest of
which he was an eye-witness, at Alemaer in Holland, a poor
husbandman that still hunted about graves, and kept in
churchyards, of a pale, black, ugly, and fearful look. Such
belike, or little better, were King Praetus' daughters, that
thought themselves kine. And Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel, as
some interpreters hold, was only troubled with this kind of
madness. This disease perhaps gave occasion to that bold
assertion of Pliny, "some men were turned into wolves in his
time, and from wolves to men again:" and to that fable of
Pausanias, of a man that was ten years a wolf, and afterwards
turned to his former shape: to Ovid's tale of Lycaon, &c. He
that is desirous to hear of this disease, or more examples,
let him read Austin in his 18th book de Civitate Dei, cap. 5.
Mizaldus, cent. 5. 77. Sckenkius, lib. 1. Hildesheim, spicel.
2. de Mania. Forrestus. lib. 10. de morbis cerebri. Olaus
Magnus, Vicentius' Bellavicensis, spec. met. lib. 31. c. 122.
Pierius, Bodine, Zuinger, Zeilger, Peucer, Wierus, Spranger,
&c. This malady, saith Avicenna, troubleth men most in
February, and is now-a-days frequent in Bohemia and Hungary,
according to Heurnius. Schernitzius will have it common in
Livonia. They lie hid most part all day, and go abroad in the
night, barking, howling, at graves and deserts; "they have
usually hollow eyes, scabbed legs and thighs, very dry and
pale," saith Altomarus; he gives a reason there of all the
symptoms, and sets down a brief cure of them.

Hydrophobia is a kind of madness, well known in every
village, which comes by the biting of a mad dog, or
scratching, saith Aurelianus; touching, or smelling alone
sometimes as Sckenkius proves, and is incident to many other
creatures as well as men: so called because the parties
affected cannot endure the sight of water, or any liquor,
supposing still they see a mad dog in it. And which is more
wonderful; though they be very dry, (as in this malady they
are) they will rather die than drink: Caelius Aurelianus, an
ancient writer, makes a doubt whether this Hydrophobia be a
passion of the body or the mind. The part affected is the
brain: the cause, poison that comes from the mad dog, which
is so hot and dry, that it consumes all the moisture in the
body. Hildesheim relates of some that died so mad; and being
cut up, had no water, scarce blood, or any moisture left in
them. To such as are so affected, the fear of water begins at
fourteen days after they are bitten, to some again not till
forty or sixty days after: commonly saith Heurnius, they
begin to rave, fly water and glasses, to look red, and swell
in the face, about twenty days after (if some remedy be not
taken in the meantime) to lie awake, to be pensive, sad, to
see strange visions, to bark and howl, to fall into a swoon,
and oftentimes fits of the falling sickness. Some say, little
things like whelps will be seen in their urine. If any of
these signs appear, they are past recovery. Many times these
symptoms will not appear till six or seven months after,
saith Codronchus; and sometimes not till seven or eight
years, as Guianerius; twelve as Albertus; six or eight months
after, as Galen holds. Baldus the great lawyer died of it: an
Augustine friar, and a woman in Delft, that were Forrestus'
patients, were miserably consumed with it. The common cure in
the country (for such at least as dwell near the sea-side) is
to duck them over head and ears in sea water; some use
charms: every good wife can prescribe medicines. But the best
cure to be had in such cases, is from the most approved
physicians; they that will read of them, may consult with
Dioscorides, lib. 6. c. 37, Heurnius, Hildesheim,
Capivaccius, Forrestus, Sckenkius, and before all others
Codronchus an Italian, who hath lately written two exquisite
books on the subject.

Chorus sancti Viti, or S. Vitus' dance; the lascivious dance,
Paracelsus calls it, because they that are taken from it, can
do nothing but dance till they be dead or cured. It is so
called, for that the parties so troubled were wont to go to
S. Vitus for help, and after they had danced there awhile,
they were certainly freed. 'Tis strange to hear how long they
will dance, and in what manner, over stools, forms, tables;
even great bellied women sometimes (and yet never hurt their
children) will dance so long that they can stir neither hand
nor foot, but seem to be quite dead. One in red clothes they
cannot abide. Music above all things they love, and therefore
magistrates in Germany will hire musicians to play to them,
and some lusty sturdy companions to dance with them. This
disease hath been very common in Germany, as appears by those
relations of Sckenkius, and Paracelsus in his book of
madness, who brags how many several persons he hath cured of
it. Felix Platerus de mentis alienat. cap. 3. reports of a
woman in Basil whom he saw, that danced a whole month
together. The Arabians call it a kind of palsy. Bodine in his
5th book de Repub. cap. 1, speaks of this infirmity; Monavius
in his last epistle to Scoltizius, and in another to
Dudithus, where you may read more of it.

The last kind of madness or melancholy, is that demoniacal
(if I may so call it) obsession or possession of devils,
which Platerus and others would have to be preternatural:
stupend things are said of them, their actions, gestures,
contortions, fasting, prophesying, speaking languages they
were never taught, &c. Many strange stories are related of
them, which because some will not allow, (for Deacon and
Darrel have written large volumes on this subject pro and
con.) I voluntarily omit.

Fuschius, institut. lib. 3. sec. 1. cap. 11, Felix Plater,
Laurentius, add to these another fury that proceeds from
love, and another from study, another divine or religious
fury; but these more properly belong to melancholy; of all
which I will speak apart, intending to write a whole book of
them.



SUBSECT. V.-- Melancholy in Disposition, improperly so
called, Equivocations.


MELANCHOLY, the subject of our present discourse, is either
in disposition or habit. In disposition, is that transitory
melancholy which goes and comes upon every small occasion of
sorrow, need, sickness, trouble, fear, grief; passion, or
perturbation of the mind, any manner of care, discontent, or
thought, which causeth anguish, dulness, heaviness and
vexation of spirit, any ways opposite to pleasure, mirth,
joy, delight, causing frowardness in us, or a dislike. In
which equivocal and improper sense, we call him melancholy
that is dull, sad, sour, lumpish, ill-disposed, solitary, any
way moved, or displeased. And from these mclancholy
dispositions, no man living is free, no stoic, none so wise,
none so happy, none so patient, so generous, so godly, so
divine, that can vindicate himself; so well composed, but
more or less, some time or other he feels the smart of it.
Melancholy in this sense is the character of mortality. "Man
that is born of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of
trouble." Zeno, Cato, Socrates himself, whom Aelian so highly 
commends for a moderate temper, that "nothing could disturb
him, but going out, and coming in, still Socrates kept the
same serenity of countenance, what misery soever befel him,"
(if we may believe Plato his disciple) was much tormented
with it. Q. Metellus, in whom Valerius gives instance of all
happiness, "the most fortunate man then living, born in that
most flourishing city of Rome, of noble parentage, a proper
man of person, well qualified, healthful, rich, honourable, a
senator, a consul, happy in his wife, happy in his children,"
&c., yet this man was not void of melancholy, he had his
share of sorrow. Polycrates Samius, that flung his ring into
the sea, because he would participate of discontent with
others, and had it miraculously restored to him again shortly
after, by a fish taken as he angled, was not free from
melancholy dispositions. No man can cure himself; the very
gods had bitter pangs, and frequent passions, as their own
poets put upon them. In general, "as the heaven, so is our
life, sometimes fair, sometimes overcast, tempestuous, and
serene; as in a rose, flowers and prickles; in the year
itself, a temperate summer sometimes, a hard winter, a
drought, and then again pleasant showers: so is our life
intermixed with joys, hopes, fears, sorrows, calumnies;"
Invicem cedunt dolor et voluptas, there is a succession of
pleasure and pain.

--"medio de fonte leporum,
Surgit amari aliquid in ipsis floribus angat."

"Even in the midst of laughing there is sorrow" (as Solomon
holds): even in the midst of all our feasting and jollity,
as, Austin infers in his Com. on the 41st Psalm, there is
grief and discontent. Inter delicias semper aliquid saevi nos
strangulat, for a pint of honey thou shalt here likely find a
gallon of gall, for a dram of pleasure a pound of pain, for
an inch of mirth an ell of moan; as ivy doth an oak, these
miseries encompass our life. And it is most absurd and
ridiculous for any mortal man to look for a perpetual tenure
of happiness in this life. Nothing so prosperous and
pleasant. but it hath  some bitterness in it, some
complaining, some grudging; it is all ?????p?????
[glychopichron], a mixed passion, and like a chequer table,
black and white men, families, cities, have their falls and
wanes; now trines, sextiles, then quartiles and oppositions.
We are not here as those angels, celestial powers and bodies,
sun and moon, to finish our course without all offence, with
such constancy, to continue for so many ages: but subject to
infirmities, miseries, interrupted, tossed and tumbled up and
down, carried about with every small blast, often molested
and disquieted upon each slender occasion, uncertain,
brittle, and so is all that we trust unto. "And he that knows
not this is not armed to endure it, is not fit to live in
this world (as one condoles our time), he knows not the
condition of it, where with a reciprocalty, pleasure and pain
are still united, and succeed one another in a ring." Exi e
mundo, get thee gone hence if thou canst not brook it; there
is no way to avoid it, but to arm thyself with patience, with
magnanimity, to oppose thyself unto it, to suffer affliction
as a good soldier of Christ; as Paul adviseth constantly to
bear it. But forasmuch as so few can embrace this good
counsel of his, or use it aright, but rather as so many brute
beasts give a way to their passion, voluntary subject and
precipitate themselves into a labyrinth of cares, woes,
miseries, and suffer their souls to be overcome by them,
cannot arm themselves with that patience as they ought to do,
it falleth out oftentimes that these dispositions become
habits, and "many affects contemned (as Seneca notes) make a
disease. Even as one distillation, not yet grown to custom,
makes a cough; but continual and inveterate causeth a
consumption of the lungs;" so do these our melancholy
provocations: and according as the humour itself is intended,
or remitted in men, as their temperature of body, or rational
soul is better able to make resistance; so are they more or
less affected. For that which is but a flea-biting to one,
causeth insufferable torment to another; and which one by his
singular moderation, and well-composed carriage can happily
overcome, a second is no whit able to sustain, but upon every
small occasion of misconceived abuse, injury, grief;
disgrace, loss, cross, humour, &c. (if solitary, or idle)
yields so far to passion, that his complexion is altered, his
digestion hindered, his sleep gone, his spirits obscured, and
his heart heavy, his hypochondries misaffected; wind,
crudity, on a sudden overtake him, and he himself overcome
with melancholy. As it is with a man imprisoned for debt, if
once in the gaol, every creditor will bring his action
against him, and there likely hold him. If any discontent
seize upon a patient, in an instant all other perturbations
(for -- qua data porta ruunt) will set upon him, and then
like a lame dog or broken-winged goose he droops and pines
away, and is brought at last to that ill habit or malady of
melancholy itself. So that as the philosophers make eight
degrees of heat and cold, we may make eighty-eight of
melancholy, as the parts affected are diversely seized with
it, or have been plunged more or less into this infernal
gulph, or waded deeper into it. But all these melancholy
fits, howsoever pleasing at first, or displeasing, violent
and tyrannizing over those whom they seize on for the time;
yet these fits I say, or men affected, are but improperly so
called, because they continue not, but come and go, as by
some objects they are moved. This melancholy of which, we are
to treat, is a habit, morbus sonticus, or chronicus, a
chronic or continuate disease, a settled humour, as
Aurelianus and others call it, not errant, but fixed; and as
it was long increasing, so now being (pleasant, or painful)
grown to an habit, it will hardly be removed.



SECT. I. MEMB. II.

SUBSECT. I.-- Digression of Anatomy.


BEFORE I proceed to define the disease of melancholy, what it
is, or to discourse farther of it, I hold it not impertinent
to make a brief digression of the anatomy of the body and
faculties of the soul, for the better understanding of that
which is to follow; because many hard words will often occur,
as myrache, hypochondries, emrods, &c., imagination, reason,
humours, spirits, vital, natural, animal, nerves, veins,
arteries, chylus, pituita; which by the vulgar will not so
easily be perceived, what they are, how cited, and to what
end they serve, And besides, it may peradventure give
occasion to some men to examine more accurately, search
further into this most excellent subject, and thereupon with
that royal prophet to praise God, ("for a man is fearfully
and wonderfully made, and curiously wrought") that have time
and leisure enough, and are sufficiently informed in all
other worldly businesses, as to make a good bargain, buy and
sell, to keep and make choice of a fair hawk, hound, horse,
&c. But for such matters as concern the knowledge of
themselves, they are wholly ignorant and careless; they know
not what this body and soul are, how combined, of what parts
and faculties they consist, or how a man differs from a dog.
And what can be more ignominious and filthy (as Melancthon
well inveighs) "than for a man not to know the structure and
composition of his own body, especially since the knowledge
of it tends so much to the preservation of his health, and
information of his manners?" To stir them up therefore to
this study, to peruse those elaborate works of Galen,
Bauhines, Plater, Vesalius, Falopius, Laurentius, Remelinus,
&c., which have written copiously in Latin; or that which
some of our industrious countrymen have done in our mother
tongue, not long since, as that translation of Columbus and
Microcosmographia, in thirteen books, I have made this brief
digression. Also because Wecker, Melancthon, Fernelius,
Fuschius, and those tedious Tracts de Anima (which have more
compendiously handled and written of this matter) are not at
all times ready to be had, to give them some small taste, or
notice of the rest, let this epitome suffice.



SUBSECT. II.-- Division of the Body, Humours, Spirits.


OF the parts of the body there may be many divisions: the
most approved is that of Laurentius, out of Hippocrates:
which is, into parts contained, or containing. Contained, are
either humours or spirits.

Humours.] A humour is a liquid or fluent part of the body,
comprehended in it, for the preservation of it; and is either
innate or born with us, or adventitious and acquisite. The
radical or innate, is daily supplied by nourishment, which
some call cambium, and make those secondary humours of ros
and gluten to maintain it: or acquisite, to maintain these
four first primary humours, coming and proceeding from the
first concoction in the liver, by which means chylus is
excluded. Some divide them into profitable and
excrementitious. But Crato out of Hippocrates will have all
four to be juice, and not excrement; without which no living
creature can be sustained: which four, though they be
comprehended in the mass of blood, yet they have their
several affections, by which they are distinguished from one
another, and from those adventitious, peccant, or diseased
humours, as Melancthon calls them.

Blood.] Blood is a hot, sweet, temperate, red humour,
prepared in the meseraic veins, and made of the most
temperate parts of the chylus in the liver, whose office is
to nourish the whole body, to give it strength and colour,
being dispersed by the veins through every part of it. And
from it spirits are first begotten in the heart, which
afterwards by the arteries are communicated to the other
parts.

Pituita, or phlegm, is a cold and moist humour, begotten of
the colder part of the chylus (or white juice coming out of
the meat digested in the stomach), in the liver; his office
is to nourish and moisten the members of the body, which as
the tongue are moved, that they be not over dry.

Choler is hot and dry, bitter, begotten of the hotter parts
of the chylus, and gathered to the gall: it helps the natural
heat and senses, and serves to the expelling of excrements.

Melancholy.] Melancholy, cold and dry, thick, black, and
sour, begotten of the more feculent part of nourishment, and
purged from the Spleen, is a bridle to the other two hot
humours, blood and choler, preserving them in the blood, and
nourishing the bones. These four humours have some analogy
with the four elements, and to the four ages in man.

Serum, Sweat, Tears.] To these humours you may add serum,
which is the matter of urine, and those excrementitious
humours of the third concoction, sweat and tears.

Spirits.] Spirit is a most subtile vapour, which is expressed
from the blood, and the instrument of the soul, to perform
all his actions; a common tie or medium between the body and
the soul, as some will have it; or as in Paracelsus, a fourth
soul of itself. Melancthon holds the fountain of these
spirits to be the heart, begotten there; and afterward
conveyed to the brain, they take another nature to them. Of
these spirits there be three kinds, according to the three
principal parts, brain, heart, liver; natural, vital, animal.
The natural are begotten in the liver, and thence dispersed
through the veins, to perform those natural actions. The
vital spirits are made in the heart of the natural, which by
the arteries are transported to all the other parts: if the
spirits cease, then life ceaseth, as in a syncope or
swooning. The animal spirits formed of the vital, brought up
to the brain, and diffused by the nerves, to the subordinate
members, give sense and motion to them all.



SUBSECT. III.-- Similar Parts.


Similar Parts.] CONTAINING parts, by reason of their more
solid substance, are either homogeneal or heterogeneal,
similar or dissimilar; so Aristotle divides them, lib. 1,
cap. 1, de Hist. Animal.; Laurentius, cap. 20, lib. 1.
Similar, or homogeneal, are such as, if they be divided, are
still severed into parts of the same nature, as water into
water. Of these some be spermatical, some fleshy or carnal.
Spermatical are such as are immediately begotten of the seed,
which are bones, gristles, ligaments, membranes, nerves,
arteries, veins, skins, fibres or strings, fat.

Bones.] The bones are dry and hard, begotten of the thickest
of the seed, to strengthen and sustain other parts: some say
there be 304, some 307, or 313 in man's body. They have no
nerves in them, and are therefore without sense.

A gristle is a substance softer than bone, and harder than
the rest, flexible, and serves to maintain the parts of
motion.

Ligaments are they that tie the bones together, and other
parts to the bones, with their subserving tendons: membranes'
office is to cover the rest.

Nerves, or sinews, are membranes without, and full of marrow
within; they proceed from the brain, and carry the animal
spirits for sense and motion. Of these some be harder, some
softer; the softer serve the senses, and there be seven pair
of them. The first be the optic nerves, by which we see; the
second move the eyes; the third pair serve for the tongue to
taste; the fourth pair for the taste in the palate; the fifth
belong to the ears; the sixth pair is most ample, and runs
almost over all the bowels; the seventh pair moves the
tongue. The harder sinews serve for the motion of the inner
parts, proceeding from the marrow in the back, of whom there
be thirty combinations, seven of the neck, twelve of the
breast, &c.

Arteries.] Arteries are long and hollow, with a double skin
to convey the vital spirits; to discern which the better,
they say that Vesalius the anatomist was wont to cut up men
alive. They arise in the left side of the heart, and are
principally two, from which the rest are derived, aorta and
venosa: aorta is the root of all the other, which serve the
whole body; the other goes to the lungs, to fetch air to
refrigerate the heart.

Veins.] Veins are hollow and round, like pipes, arising from
the liver, carrying blood and natural spirits; they feed all
the parts. Of these there be two chief; Vena porta and Vena
cava, from which the rest are corrivated. That Vena porta is
a vein coming from the concave of the liver, and receiving
those meseraical veins, by whom he takes the chylus from the
stomach and guts, and conveys it to the liver. The other
derives blood from the liver to nourish all the other
dispersed members. The branches of that Vena porta are the
meseraical and haemorrhoides. The branches of the Cava are
inward or outward. Inward, seminal or emulgent. Outward, in
the head, arms, feet, &c., and have several names.

Fibrae, Fat, Flesh.] Fibrae are strings, white and solid,
dispersed through the whole member, and right, oblique,
transverse, all which have their several uses. Fat is a
similar part, moist, without blood, composed of the most
thick and unctuous matter of the blood. The skin covers the
rest, and hath Cuticulum or a little skin under it. Flesh is
soft and ruddy, composed of the congealing of blood, &c.



SUBSECT. IV.-- Dissimilar Parts.


DISSIMILAR parts are those which we call organical, or
instrumental, and they be inward or outward. The chiefest
outward parts are situate forward or backward:--forward, the
crown and foretop of the head, skull, face, forehead,
temples, chin, eyes, ears, nose, &c., neck, breast, chest,
upper and lower part of the belly, hypochondries, navel,
groin, flank, &c.; backward, the hinder part of the head,
back, shoulders, sides, loins, hipbones, os sacrum, buttocks,
&c. Or joints, arms, hands, feet, legs, thighs, knees, &c. Or
common to both, which, because they are obvious and well
known, I have carelessly repeated, eaque praeecipua et
grandiora tantum; quod reliquum ex libris de anima qui volet,
accipiat.

Inward organical parts, which cannot be seen, are divers in
number, and have several names, functions, and divisions; but
that of Laurentius is most notable, into noble or ignoble
parts. Of the noble there be three principal parts, to which
all the rest belong, and whom they serve -- brain, heart,
liver; according to whose site, three regions, or a threefold
division, is made of the whole body. As first of the head, in
which the animal organs are contained, and brain itself,
which by his nerves give sense and motion to the rest, and
is, as it were, a privy counsellor and chancellor to the
heart. The second region is the chest, or middle belly, in
which the heart as king keeps his court, and by his arteries
communicates life to the whole body. The third region is the
lower belly, in which the liver resides as a Legat a latere,
with the rest of those natural organs, serving for
concoction, nourishment, expelling of excrements. This lower
region is distinguished from the upper by the midriff, or
diaphragma, and is subdivided again by some into three
concavities or regions, upper, middle, and lower. The upper
of the hypochondries, in whose right side is the liver, the
left the spleen; from which is denominated hypochondriacal
melancholy. The second of the navel and flanks, divided from
the first by the rim. The last of the water course, which is
again subdivided into three other parts. The Arabians make
two parts of this region, Epigastrium and Hypogastrium, upper
or lower. Epigastrium they call Mirach, from whence comes
Mirachialis Melancholia, sometimes mentioned of them. Of
these several regions I will treat in brief apart; and, first
of the third region, in which the natural organs are
contained.

De Anima.-- The Lower Region, Natural Organs.] But you that
are readers in the meantime, "Suppose you were now brought
into some sacred temple, or majestical palace (as Melancthon
saith), to behold not the matter only, but the singular art,
workmanship, and counsel of this our great Creator. And it is
a pleasant and profitable speculation, if it be considered
aright." The parts of this region, which present themselves
to your consideration and view, are such as serve to
nutrition or generation. Those of nutrition serve to the
first or second concoction; as the oesophagus or gullet,
which brings meat and drink into the stomach. The ventricle
or stomach, which is seated in the midst of that part of the
belly beneath the midriff, the kitchen, as it were, of the
first concoction, and which turns our meat into chylus. It
hath two mouths, one above, another beneath. The upper is
sometimes taken for the stomach itself; the lower and nether
door (as Wecker calls it) is named Pylorus. This stomach is
sustained by a large kell or kaull, called omentum; which
some will have the same with peritoneum, or rim of the belly.
From the stomach to the very fundament are produced the guts,
or intestina, which serve a little to alter and distribute
the chylus, and convey away the excrements. They are divided
into small and great, by reason of their site and substance,
slender or thicker: the slender is duodenum, or whole gut,
which is next to the stomach, some twelve inches long, saith
Fuschius. Jejunum, or empty gut, continuate to the other,
which hath many meseraic veins annexed to it, which take part
of the chylus to the liver from it. Ilion the third, which
consists of many crinkles, which serves with the rest to
receive, keep, and distribute the chylus from the stomach.
The thick guts are three, the blind gut, colon, and right
gut. The blind is a thick and short gut, having one mouth, in
which the ilion and colon meet: it receives the excrements,
and conveys them to the colon. This colon hath many windings,
that the excrements pass not away too fast: the right gut is
strait, and conveys the excrements to the fundament, whose
lower part is bound up with certain muscles called
sphincters, that the excrements may be the better contained,
until such time as a man be willing to go to the stool. In
the midst of these guts is situated the mesenterium or
midriff composed of many veins, arteries, and much fat,
serving chiefly to sustain the guts. All these parts serve
the first concoction. To the second, which is busied either
in refining the good nourishment or expelling the bad, is
chiefly belonging the liver, like in colour to congealed
blood, the shop of blood, situate in the right hypercondry,
in figure like to a half-moon -- Generosum membrum Melancthon
styles it, a generous part; it serves to turn the chylus to
blood, for the nourishment of the body. The excrements of it
are either choleric or watery, which the other subordinate
parts convey. The gall placed in the concave of the liver,
extracts choler to it: the spleen, melancholy; which is
situate on the left side, over against the liver, a spongy
matter that draws this black choler to it by a secret virtue,
and feeds upon it, conveying the rest to the bottom of the
stomach, to stir up appetite, or else to the guts as an
excrement. That watery matter the two kidneys expurgate by
those emulgent veins and ureters. The emulgent draw this
superfluous moisture from the blood; the two ureters convey
it to the bladder, which by reason of his site in the lower
belly, is apt to receive it, having two parts, neck and
bottom: the bottom holds the water, the neck is constringed
with a muscle, which, as a porter, keeps the water from
running out against our will.

Members of generation are common to both sexes, or peculiar
to one; which, because they are impertinent to my purpose, I
do voluntarily omit.

Middle Region.] Next in order is the middle region, or chest,
which comprehends the vital faculties and parts; which (as I
have said) is separated from the lower belly by the
diaphragma or midriff, which is a skin consisting of many
nerves, membranes; and amongst other uses it hath, is the
instrument of laughing. There is also a certain thin
membrane, full of sinews, which covereth the whole chest
within, and is called pleura, the seat of the disease called
pleurisy, when it is inflamed; some add a third skin, which
is termed Mediastinus, which divides the chest into two
parts, right and left; of this region the principal part is
the heart, which is the seat and fountain of life, of heat,
of spirit; of pulse and respiration -- the sun of our body,
the king and sole commander of it -- the seat and organ of
all passions and affections. Primum vivens, ultimum moriens,
it lives first, and dies last in all creatures. Of a
pyramidical form, and not much unlike to a pine-apple; a part
worthy of admiration, that can yield such variety of
affections, by whose motion it is dilated or contracted, to
stir and command the humours in the body. As in sorrow,
melancholy; in anger, choler; in joy, to send the blood
outwardly; in sorrow, to call it in; moving the humours, as
horses do a chariot. This heart, though it be one sole
member, yet it may be divided into two creeks right and left.
The right is like the moon increasing, bigger than the other
part, and receives blood from Vena cava distributing some of
it to the lungs to nourish them; the rest to the left side,
to engender spirits. The left creek hath the form of a cone,
and is the seat of life, which, as a torch doth oil, draws
blood unto it, begetting of it spirits and fire; and as fire
in a torch, so are spirits in the blood; and by that great
artery called aorta, it sends vital spirits over the body,
and takes air from the lungs by that artery which is called
venosa; so that both creeks have their vessels, the right two
veins, the left two arteries, besides those two common
anfractuous ears, which serve them both; the one to hold
blood, the other air, for several uses. The lungs is a thin
spongy part, like an ox hoof (saith Fernelius), the town-
clerk or crier (one terms it), the instrument of voice, as an
orator to a king; annexed to the heart, to express their
thoughts by voice. That it is the instrument of voice, is
manifest, in that no creature can speak, or utter any voice,
which wanteth these lights. It is besides the instrument of
respiration, or breathing; and its office is to cool the
heart, by sending air unto it, by the venosal artery, which
vein comes to the lungs by that asperti arteria, which
consists of many gristles, membranes, nerves, taking in air
at the nose and mouth, and by it likewise exhales the fumes
of the heart.

In the upper region serving the animal faculties, the chief
organ is the brain, which is a soft, marrowish, and white
substance, engendered of the purest part of seed and spirits, 
included by many skins, and seated within the skull or brain
pan; and it is the most noble organ under heaven, the
dwellinghouse and seat of the soul, the habitation of wisdom,
memory, judgment, reason, and in which man is most like unto
God; and therefore nature hath covered it with a skull of
hard bone, and two skins or membranes, whereof the one is
called dura mater, or meninx, the other pia mater. The dura
mater is next to the skull, above the other, which includes
and protects the brain. When this is taken away, the pia
mater is to be seen, a thin membrane, the next and immediate
cover of the brain, and not covering only, but entering into
it. The brain itself is divided into two parts, the fore and
hinder part; the fore part is much bigger than the other,
which is called the little brain in respect of it. This fore
part hath many concavities distinguished by certain
ventricles: which are the receptacles of the spirits, brought
hither by the arteries from the heart, and are there refined
to a more heavenly nature, to perform the actions of the
soul. Of these ventricles there are three -- right, left, and
middle. The right and left answer to their sight, and beget
animal spirits; if they be any way hurt, sense and motion
ceaseth. These ventricles, moreover, are held to be the seat
of the common sense. The middle ventricle is a common
concourse and concavity of them both, and hath two passages -
- the one to receive pituita, and the other extends itself to
the fourth creek; in this they place imagination and
cogitation, and so the three ventricles of the fore part of
the brain are used. The fourth creek behind the head is
common to the cerebel or little brain, and marrow of the
back-bone, the last and most solid of all the rest, which
receives the animal spirits from the other ventricles, and
conveys them to the marrow in the back, and is the place
where they say the memory is seated.



SUBSECT. V.-- Of the Soul and her Faculties.


ACCORDING to Aristotle, the soul is defined to be e?te?e?e?a
(entelecheia), perfectio et actus primus corporis organici,
vitam habentis in potentia: the perfection or first act of an
organical body, having power of life, which most philosophers
approve. But many doubts arise about the essence, subject,
seat, distinction. and subordinate faculties of it. For the
essence and particular knowledge, of all other things it is
most hard (be it of man or beast) to discern, as Aristotle
himself; Tully, Picus Mirandula, Tolet, and other Neoteric
philosophers confess:--"We can understand all things by her,
but what she is we cannot apprehend." Some therefore make one
soul, divided into three principal faculties; others, three
distinct souls Which question of late hath been much
controverted by Picolomineus and Zabarel. Paracelsus will
have four souls, adding to the three grand faculties a
spiritual soul: which opinion of his, Campanella, in his book
de sensu rerum, much labours to demonstrate and prove,
because carcasses bleed at the sight of the murderer; with
many such arguments: And some again, one soul of all
creatures whatsoever, differing only in organs; and that
beasts have reason as well as men, though, for some defect of
organs, not in such measure. Others make a doubt whether it
be all in all, and all in every part; which is amply
discussed in Zabarel amongst the rest. The common division of
the soul is into three principal faculties -- vegetal,
sensitive, and rational, which make three distinct kinds of
living creatures -- vegetal plants, sensible beasts, rational
men. How these three principal faculties are distinguished
and connected, Humano ingenio inaccessum videtur, is beyond
human capacity, as Taurellus, Philip, Flavius, and others
suppose. The inferior may be alone, but the superior cannot
subsist without the other; so sensible includes vegetal,
rational both; which are contained in it (saith Aristotle) ut
trigonus in tetragono, as a triangle in a quadrangle.

Vegetal Soul.] Vegetal, the first of the three distinct
faculties, is defined to be "a substantial act of an
organical body, by which it is nourished, augmented, and
begets another like unto itself" In which definition, three
several operations are specified --altrix, auctrix,
procreatrix; the first is nutrition, whose object is
nourishment, meat, drink, and the like; his organ the liver
in sensible creatures; in plants, the root or sap. His office
is to turn the nutriment into the substance of the body
nourished, which he performs by natural heat. This nutritive
operation hath four other subordinate functions or powers
belonging to it -- attraction, retention, digestion,
expulsion.

Attraction.] Attraction is a ministering faculty, which, as a
loadstone doth iron, draws meat into the stomach, or as a
lamp doth oil; and this attractive power is very necessary in
plants, which suck up moisture by the root, as another mouth,
into the sap, as a like stomach.

Retention.] Retention keeps it, being attracted into the
stomach, until such time it be concocted; for if it should
pass away straight, the body could not be nourished.

Digestion.] Digestion is performed by natural heat; for as
the flame of a torch consumes oil, wax, tallow, so doth it
alter and digest the nutritive matter. Indigestion is
opposite unto it, for want of natural heat, Of this digestion
there be three differences -- maturation, elixation,
assation.

Maturation.] Maturation is especially observed in the fruits
of trees; which are then said to be ripe, when the seeds are
fit to be sown again. Crudity is opposed to it, which
gluttons, epicures, and idle persons are most subject unto,
that use no exercise to stir natural heat, or else choke it,
as too much wood puts out a fire.

Elixation.] Elixation is the seething of meat in the stomach,
by the said natural heat, as meat is boiled in a pot; to
which corruption or putrefaction is opposite.

Assation.] Assation is a concoction, of the inward moisture
by heat; his opposite is a semiustulation.

Order of Concoction four-fold.] Besides these three several
operations of digestion, there is a four-fold order of
concoction:-- mastication, or chewing in the mouth;
chilification of this so chewed meat in the stomach; the
third is in the liver, to turn this chylus into blood, called
sanguification; the last is assimulation, which is in every
part.

Expulsion.] Expulsion is a power of nutrition, by which it 
expels all superfluous excrements, and reliques of meat and
drink, by the guts, bladder, pores; as by purging, vomiting,
spitting, sweating, urine, hairs, nails, &c.

Augmentation.] As this nutritive faculty serves to nourish
the body, so doth the augmenting faculty (the second
operation or power of the vegetal faculty) to the increasing
of it in quantity, according to all dimensions, long, broad,
thick, and to make it grow till it come to his due proportion
and perfect shape; which hath his period of augmentation, as
of consumption; and that most certain, as the poet observes:-
-

"Stat sua cuique dies, breve et irreparabile tempus
Omnibus est vitae"--
"A term of life is set to every man,
Which is but short, and pass it no one can."


Generation.] The last of these vegetal faculties is
generation, which begets another by means of seed, like unto
itself to the perpetual preservation of the species. To this
faculty they ascribe three subordinate operations:-- the
first to turn nourishment into seed, &c.

Life and Death concomitants of the Vegetal Faculties.]
Necessary concomitants or affections of this vegetal faculty
are life and his privation, death. To the preservation of
life the natural heat is most requisite, though siccity and
humidity, and those first qualities, be not excluded. This
heat is likewise in plants, as appears by their increasing,
fructifying, &c., though not so easily perceived. In all
bodies it must have radical moisture to preserve it, that it
be not consumed; to which preservation our clime, country,
temperature, and the good or bad use of those six non-natural
things avail much. For as this natural heat and moisture
decays, so doth our life itself; and if not prevented before
by some violent accident, or interrupted through our own
default, is in the end dried up by old age, and extinguished
by death for want of matter, as a lamp for defect of oil to
maintain it.



SUBSECT. VI -- Of the sensible Soul.


NEXT in order is the sensible faculty, which is as far beyond
the other in dignity as a beast is preferred to a plant,
having those vegetal powers included in it. 'Tis defined an
"Act of an organical body by which it lives, hath sense,
appetite, judgment, breath, and motion." His object in
general is a sensible or passible quality, because the sense
is affected with it. The general organ is the brain, from
which principally the sensible operations are derived. This
sensible soul is divided into two parts, apprehending or
moving. By the apprehensive power we perceive the species of
sensible things present, or absent, and retain them as wax
doth the print of a seal. By the moving, the body is
outwardly carried from one place to another; or inwardly
moved by spirits and pulse. The apprehensive faculty is
subdivided into two parts, inward or outward. Outward, as the
five senses, of touching, hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting,
to which you may add Scaliger's sixth sense of titillation,
if you please; or that of speech, which is the sixth external
sense, according to Lullius. Inward are three -- common
sense, phantasy, memory. Those five outward senses have their
object in outward things only and such as are present, as the
eye sees no colour except it be at hand, the ear sound. Three
of these senses are of commodity, hearing, sight, and smell;
two of necessity, touch, and taste, without which we cannot
live. Besides, the sensitive power is active or passive.
Active in sight, the eye sees the colour; passive when it is
hurt by his object, as the eye by the sun-beams. According to
that axiom, Visibile forte destruit sensum (Too bright an
object destroys the organ.) Or if the object be not pleasing,
as a bad sound to the ear, a stinking smell to the nose, &c..

Sight.] Of these five senses, sight is held to be most
precious, and the best, and that by reason of his object, it
sees the whole body at once. By it we learn, and discern all
things, a sense most excellent for use: to the sight three
things are required; the object, the organ, and the medium.
The object in general is visible, or that which is to be
seen, as colour; and all shining bodies. The medium is the
illumination of the air, which comes from light, commonly
called diaphanum; for in dark we cannot see. The organ is the
eye, and chiefly the apple of it, which by those optic
nerves, concurring both in one, conveys the sight to the
common sense. Between the organ and object a true distance is
required, that it be not too near, nor too far off. Many
excellent questions appertain to this sense, discussed by
philosophers: as whether this sight be caused intra mittendo,
vel extra mittendo, &c., by receiving in the visible species,
or sending of them out, which Plato, Plutarch, Macrobius,
Lactantius, and others dispute. And besides it is the subject
of the perspectives, of which Alhazen the Arabian, Vitellio,
Roger Bacon, Baptista Porta, Guidus Ubaldus, Aquilonius, &c.,
have written whole volumes.

Hearing.] Hearing, a most excellent outward sense, "by which
we learn and get knowledge." His object is sound, or that
which is heard; the medium, air; organ the ear. To the sound,
which is a collision of the air, three things are required; a
body to strike, as the hand of a musician; the body struck,
which must be solid and able to resist; as a bell, lute-
string, not wool, or sponge; the medium, the air; which is
inward, or outward; the outward being struck or collided by a
solid body, still strikes the next air, until it come to that
inward natural air, which as an exquisite organ is contained
in a little skin formed like a drum-head, and struck upon by
certain small instruments like drum-sticks, conveys the sound
by a pair of nerves, appropriated to that use, to the common
sense, as to a judge of sounds. There is great variety and
much delight in them; for the knowledge of which, consult
with Boethius and other musicians.

Smelling.] Smelling is an "outward sense, which apprehends by
the nostrils drawing in air;" and of all the rest it is the
weakest sense in men. The organ in the nose, or two small
hollow pieces of flesh a little above it: the medium the air
to men, as water to fish: the object, smell, arising from a
mixed body resolved, which, whether it be a quality, fume,
vapour, or exhalation, I will not now dispute, or of their
differences, and how they are caused. This sense is an organ
of health, as sight and hearing, saith Agellius, are of
discipline; and that by avoiding bad smells, as by choosing
good, which do as much alter and affect the body many times,
as diet itself.

Taste.] Taste, a necessary sense, "which perceives all
savours by the tongue and palate, and that by means of a thin
spittle, or watery juice." His organ is the tongue with his
tasting nerves; the medium, a watery juice; the object,
taste, or savour, which is a quality in the juice, arising
from the mixture of things tasted. Some make eight species or
kinds of savour, bitter, sweet, sharp, salt, &c., all which
sick men (as in an ague) cannot discern, by reason of their
organs misaffected.

Touching.] Touch, the last of the senses, and most ignoble,
yet of as great necessity as the other) and of as much
pleasure. This sense is exquisite in men, and by his nerves
dispersed all over the body, perceives any tactile quality.
His organ the nerves; his object those first qualities, hot,
dry, moist, cold; and those that follow them, hard, soft,
thick, thin, &c. Many delightsome questions are moved by
philosophers about these five senses; their organs, objects,
mediums, which for brevity I omit.



SUBSECT. VII.-- Of the Inward Senses.


Common Sense.] INNER senses are three in number, so called,
because they be within the brain-pan, as common sense,
phantasy, memory. Their objects are not only things present,
but they perceive the sensible species of things to come,
past, absent, such as were before in the sense. This common
sense is the judge or moderator of the rest, by whom we
discern all differences of objects; for by mine eye I do not
know that I see, or by mine ear that I hear, but by my common
sense, who judgeth of sounds and colours: they are but the
organs to bring the species to be censured; so that all their
objects are his, and all their offices are his. The forepart
of the brain is his organ or seat.

Phantasy.] Phantasy, or imagination, which some call
estimative, or cogitative (confirmed, saith Fernelius, by
frequent meditation), is an inner sense which doth more fully
examine the species perceived by common sense, of things
present or absent, and keeps them longer, recalling them to
mind again, or making new of his own. In time of sleep this
faculty is free, and many times conceives strange, stupend,
absurd shapes, as in sick men we commonly observe. His organ
is the middle cell of the brain; his objects all the species
communicated to him by the common sense, by comparison of
which he feigns infinite other unto himself. In melancholy
men this faculty is most powerful and strong, and often hurt;
producing many monstrous and prodigious things, especially if
it be stirred up by some terrible object, presented to it
from common sense or memory. In poets and painters
imagination forcibly works, as appears by their several
fictions, antics, images: as Ovid's house of sleep, Psyche's
palace in Apuleius, &c. In men it is subject and governed by
reason, or at least should be; but in brutes it hath no
superior, and is ratio brutorum, all the reason they have.

Memory.] Memory lays up all the species which the senses have
brought in, and records then as a good register, that they
may be forthcoming when they are called for by phantasy and
reason. His object is the same with phantasy, his seat and
organ the back part of the brain.

Affection of the senses, sleep and waking.] The affections of
these senses are sleep and waking, common to all sensible
creatures. "Sleep is a rest or binding of the outward senses.
and of the common sense, for the preservation of body and
soul" (as Scaliger defines it); for when the common sense
resteth, the outward senses rest also. The phantasy alone is
free, and his commander reason: as appears by those imaginary
dreams, which are of divers kinds, natural, divine,
demoniacal, &c., which vary according to humours, diet,
actions, objects, &c., of which Artemidorus, Cardanus, and
Sambucus, with their several interpretators, have written
great volumes. This ligation of senses proceeds from an
inhibition of spirits, the way being stopped by which they
should come; this stopping is caused of vapours arising out
of the stomach, filling the nerves, by which the spirits
should be conveyed. When these vapours are spent, the passage
is open, and the spirits perform their accustomed duties: so
that "waking is the action and motion of the senses, which
the spirits dispersed over all parts cause."



SUBSECT. VIII.-- Of the Moving Faculty.

Appetite.] This moving faculty is the other power of the
sensitive soul, which causeth all those inward and outward
animal motions in the body. It is divided into two faculties,
the power of appetite, and of moving from place to place.
This of appetite is threefold, so some will have it; natural,
as it signifies any such inclination, as of a stone to fall
downward, and such actions as retention, expulsion, which
depend not on sense, but are vegetal, as the appetite of meat
and drink; hunger and thirst. Sensitive is common to men and
brutes. Voluntary, the third, or intellective, which commands
the other two in men, and is a curb unto them, or at least
should be, but for the most part is captivated and overruled
by them; and men are led like beasts by sense, giving reins
to their concupiscence and several lusts. For by this
appetite the soul is led or inclined to follow that good
which the senses shall approve, or avoid that which they hold
evil: his object being good or evil, the one he embraceth,
the other he rejecteth; according to that aphorism, Omnia
appetunt bonum, all things seek their own good, or at least
seeming good. This power is inseparable from sense, for where
sense is, there are likewise pleasure and pain. His organ is
the same with the common sense and is divided into two
powers, or inclinations, concupiscible or irascible: or (as
one translates it) coveting, anger invading, or impugning.
Concupiscible covets always pleasant and delightsome things,
and abhors that which is distasteful, harsh, and unpleasant.
Irascible, quasi aversans per iram et odium, as avoiding it
with anger and indignation. All affections and perturbations
arise out of these two fountains, which, although the Stoics
make light of, we hold natural, and not to be resisted. The
good affections are caused by some object of the same nature;
and if present, they procure joy, which dilates the heart,
and preserves the body: if absent, they cause hope, love,
desire, and concupiscence. The bad are simple or mixed:
simple for some bad object present, as sorrow, which
contracts the heart, macerates the soul, subverts the good
estate of the body, hindering all the operations of it,
causing melancholy, and many times death itself; or future,
as fear. Out of these two arise those mixed affections and
passions of anger, which is a desire of revenge; hatred,
which is inveterate anger; zeal, which is offended with him
who hurts that he loves; and ep??a??e?a??a
(epichairechachia), a compound affection of joy and hate,
when we rejoice at other men's mischief, and are grieved at
their prosperity; pride, self-love, emulation, envy, shame,
&c., of which elsewhere.

Moving from place to place, is a faculty necessarily
following the other. For in vain were it otherwise to desire
and to abhor, if we had not likewise power to prosecute or
eschew, by moving the body from place to place: by this
faculty therefore we locally move the body, or any part of
it, and go from one place to another. To the better
performance of which, three things are requisite: that which
moves; by what it moves; that which is moved. That which
moves, is either the efficient cause, or end. The end is the
object, which is desired or eschewed; as in a dog to catch a
hare. &c. The efficient cause in man is reason, or his
subordinate phantasy, which apprehends good or bad objects:
in brutes imagination alone, which moves the appetite, the
appetite this faculty, which, by an admirable league of
nature, and by mediation of the spirit, commands the organ by
which it moves; and that consists of nerves, muscles, cords,
dispersed through the whole body, contracted and relaxed as
the spirits will, which move the muscles, or nerves in the
midst of them, and draw the cord, and so per consequens, the
joint, to the place intended. That which is moved, is the
body or some member apt to move. The motion of the body is
divers, as going, running, leaping, dancing, sitting, and
such like, referred to the predicament of situs. Worms creep,
birds fly, fishes swim; and so of parts, the chief of which
is respiration or breathing, and is thus performed. The
outward air is drawn in by the vocal artery, and sent by
mediation of the midriff to the lungs, which, dilating
themselves as a pair of bellows, reciprocally fetch it in,
and send it out to the heart to cool it; and from thence now
being hot, convey it again, still taking in fresh. Such a
like motion is that of the pulse, of which, because many have
written whole books, I will say nothing.



SUBSECT. IX.-- Of the Rational Soul.


IN the precedent subsections I have anatomized those inferior
faculties of the soul; the rational remaineth, "a pleasant
but a doubtful subject" (as one terms it), and with the like
brevity to be discussed. Many erroneous opinions are about
the essence and original of it; whether it be fire, as Zeno
held; harmony, as Aristoxenus; number, as Xenocrates; whether
it be organical, or inorganical; seated in the brain, heart
or blood; mortal or immortal; how it comes into the body.
Some hold that it is ex traduce, as Phil. 1. de Anima,
Tertullian, Lactantius de opific. Dei, cap. 19. Hugo, lib. de
Spiritu et Anima, Vincentius Bellavic. spec. natural. lib.
23. cap. 2. et 11. Hippocrates, Avicenna, and many late
writers; that one man begets another, body and soul; or as a
candle from a candle, to be produced from the seed:
otherwise, say they, a man begets but half a man, and is
worse than a beast that begets both matter and form; and
besides the three faculties of the soul must be together
infused, which is most absurd as they hold, because in beasts
they are begot, the two inferior I mean, and may not be well
separated in men. Galen supposeth the soul crasin esse, to be
the temperature itself; Trismegistus, Museus, Orpheus, Homer,
Pindarus, Phaerecides Syrus, Epicetetus, with the Chaldees
and Aegyptians, affirmed the soul to be immortal, as did
those British Druids of old. The Pythagoreans defend
Metempsychosis; and Palingenesia, that souls go from one body
to another, epota prius Lethes unda, as men into wolves,
bears, dogs, hogs, as they were inclined in their lives, or
participated in conditions.
--- "inque ferinas
Possumus ire domus, pecudumque in corpora condi."
(Ovid. Met. 15. "We, who may take up our abode in wild
beasts, or be lodged in the breasts of cattle")
Lucian's cock was first Euphorbus a captain:
"Ille ego (nam memini) Trojani tempore belli
Panthoides Euphorbus eram."
A horse, a man, a sponge. Julian the Apostate thought
Alexander's soul was descended into his body: Plato in
Timaeo, and in his Phaaedon (for aught I can perceive),
differs not much from this opinion, that it was from God at
first, and knew all, but being inclosed in the body, it
forgets, and learns anew, which he calls reminiscentia, or
recalling, and that it was put into the body for a
punishment; and thence it goes into a beast's, or man's, as
appears by his pleasant fiction de sortitione animarum, Lib.
10. de rep. and after ten thousand years is to return into
the former body again.
--- "Post Varios annos, per mille figuras,
Rursus ad humanae fertur primordia vitae,"
Others deny the immortality of it, which Pomponatus of Padua
decided out of Aristotle not long since, Plinius Avunculus,
cap. 1. lib. 2. et lib. 7. cap. 55; Seneca, lib. 7. epist. ad
Lucilium epist 55; Dicearchus in Tull. Tusc. Epicurus,
Aratus, Hippocrates, Galen, Lucretius, lib. 1.
"(Praeterea gigni pariter cum corpore, et una
Crescere sentimus, pariterque senescrer mentem)"
("Besides, we observe that the mind is born with the body,
grows with it, and decays with it.")
Averroes, and I know not how many Neoterics. "This question
of the immortality of the soul, is diversely and wonderfully
impugned and disputed, especially among the Italians of
late," saith Jab. Colerus, lib. de immort. animae, cap. 1.
The popes themselves have doubted of it: Leo Decimus, that
Epicurean pope, as some record of him, caused this question
to be dis cussed pro and con before him, and concluded at
last, as a prophane and atheistical moderator, with that
verse of Cornelius Gallus, Et redit in nihilum, quod fuit
ante nihil. It began of nothing, and in nothing it ends. Zeno
and his Stoics, as Austin quotes him, supposed the soul so
long to continue, till the body was fully putrefied, and
resolved into materia prima: but after that, in fumos
evanescere, to be extinguished and vanished; and in the mean
time, whilst the body was consuming, it wandered all abroad,
et e longinquo multa annunciare, and (as that Clazomenian
Hermotimus averred) saw pretty visions, and suffered I know
not what. Errant exangues sine corpore et ossibus umbrae.
(Ovid. 4 Met. The bloodless shades without either body or
bones wander.) Others grant the immortality thereof but they
make many fabulous fictions in the meantime of it, after the
departure from the body: like Plato's Elysian fields, and
that Turkey paradise. The souls of good men they deified; the
bad (saith Austin) became devils as they supposed; with many
such absurd tenets, which he hath confuted. Hierome, Austin,
and other Fathers of the church, hold that the soul is
immortal, created of nothing, and so infused into the child
or embryo in his mother's womb, six months after the
conception; not as those of brutes, which are ex traduce, and
dying with them vanish into nothing. To whose divine
treatises, and to the Scriptures themselves, I rejourn all
such atheistical spirits, as Tully did Atticus, doubting of
this point, to Plato's Phaaedon. Or if they desire
philosophical proofs and demonstrations, I refer them to
Niphus, Nic. Faventinus' tracts of this subject. To Fran. and
John Picus in digress: sup. 3. de Anima, Tholosanus,
Eugubinus, to Soto, Canas, Thomas, Peresius, Dandinus,
Colerus, to that elaborate tract in Zanchius, to Tolet's
Sixty Reasons, and Lessius' Twenty-two Arguments, to prove
the immortality of the soul. Campanella lib. de sensu rerum,
is large in the same discourse, Albertinus the Schoolman,
Jacob. Nactantus, tom. 2. op. handleth it in four questions.
Antony Brunus, Aonius Palearius, Marinus Marcennus, with many
others. This reasonable soul, which Austin calls a spiritual
substance moving itself is defined by philosophers to be "the
first substantial act of a natural, humane, organical body,
by which a man lives, perceives, and understands, freely
doing all things, and with election." Out of which definition
we may gather, that this rational soul includes the powers,
and performs the duties of the two other, which are contained
in it, and all three faculties make one soul, which is
inorganical of itself although it be in all parts, and
incorporeal, using their organs, and working by them. It is
divided into two chief parts, differing in office only, not
in essence. The understanding, which is the rational power
apprehending; the will, which is the rational power moving:
to which two, all the other rational powers are subject and
reduced.



SUBSECT. X.-- Of the Understanding.


"UNDERSTANDING is a power of the soul, by which we perceive,
know, remember, and judge as well singulars, as universals,
having certain innate notices or beginnings of arts, a
reflecting action, by which it judgeth of his own doings. and
examines them." Out of this definition (besides his chief
office, which is to apprehend, judge all that he performs,
without the help of any instruments or organs) three
differences appear betwixt a man and a beast. As first, the
sense only comprehends singularities, the understanding
universalities. Secondly, the sense hath no innate notions.
Thirdly, brutes cannot reflect upon themselves. Bees indeed
make neat and curious works, and many other creatures
besides; but when they have done, they cannot judge of them.
His object is God, Ens, all nature, and whatsoever is to be
understood: which successively it apprehends. The object
first moving the understanding, is some sensible thing; after
by discoursing, the mind finds out the corporeal substance,
and from thence the spiritual. His actions (some say) are
apprehension, composition, division, discoursing, reasoning,
memory, which some include in invention, and judgment. The
common divisions are of the understanding, agent, and
patient; speculative, and practical; in habit, or in act;
simple, or compound. The agent is that which is called the
wit of man, acumen or subtilty, sharpness of invention, when
he doth invent of himself without a teacher, or learns anew,
which abstracts those intelligible species from the phantasy,
and transfers them to the passive understanding, "because
there is nothing in the understanding, which was not first in
the sense." That which the imagination hath taken from the
sense, this agent judgeth of whether it be true or false; and
being so judged he commits it to the passible to be kept. The
agent is a doctor or teacher, the passive a scholar; and his
office is to keep and further judge of such things as are
committed to his charge; as a bare and rased table at first,
capable of all forms and notions. Now these notions are two-
fold, actions or habits: actions, by which we take notions
of, and perceive things; habits, which are durable lights and
notions, which we may use when we will. Some reckon up eight
kinds of them, sense, experience, intelligence, faith,
suspicion, error, opinion, science; to which are added art,
prudency, wisdom: as also syntertesis, dictamen rationis,
conscience; so that in all there be fourteen species of the
understanding, of which some are innate, as the three last
mentioned: the other are gotten by doctrine, learning, and
use. Plato will have all to be innate: Aristotle reckons up
but five inteiectual habits; two practical, as prudency,
whose end is to practise; to fabricate; wisdom to comprehend
the use and experiments of all notions, and habits
whatsoever. Which division of Aristotle (if it be considered
aright) is all one with the precedent; for three being
innate, and five acquisite, the rest are improper, imperfect,
and in a more strict examination excluded. Of all these I
should more amply dilate, but my subject will not permit.
Three of them I will only point at, as more necessary to my
following discourse.

Synteresis, or the purer part of the conscience, is an innate
habit, and doth signify "a conversation of the knowledge of
the law of God and Nature, to know good or evil." And (as our
divines hold) it is rather in the understanding than in the
will. This makes the major proposition in a practical
syllogism. The dictamen rationis is that which doth admonish
us to do good or evil, and is the minor in the syllogism. The
conscience is that which approves good or evil, justifying or
condemning our actions, and is the conclusion of the
syllogism: as in that familiar example of Regulus the Roman,
taken prisoner by the Carthaginians, and suffered to go to
Rome, on that condition he should return again, or pay so
much for his ransom. The synteresis proposeth the question;
his word, oath, promise, is to be religiously kept, although
to his enemy, and that by the law of nature. "Do not that to
another which thou wouldest not have done to thyself."
Dictamen applies it to him, and dictates this or the like:
Regulus, thou wouldst not another man should falsify his
oath, or break promise with thee: conscience concludes,
therefore, Regulus, thou dost well to perform thy promise,
and oughtest to keep thine oath. More of this in Religious
Melancholy.



SUBSECT. XI.-- Of the Will.


WILL is the other power of the rational soul, "which covets
or avoids such things as have been before judged and
apprehended by the understanding." If good, it approves; if
evil, it abhors it: so that his object is either good or
evil. Aristotle calls this our rational appetite; for as, in
the sensitive, we are moved to good or bad by our appetite,
ruled and directed by sense; so in this we are carried by
reason. Besides, the sensitive appetite hath a particular
object, good or bad; this an universal, immaterial: that
respects only things delectable and pleasant; this honest.
Again, they differ in liberty. The sensual appetite seeing an
object, if it be a convenient good, cannot but desire it; if
evil, avoid it: but this is free in his essence, "much now
depraved, obscured, and fallen from his first perfection; yet
in some of his operations still free," as to go, walk, move
at his pleasure, and to choose whether it will do, or not do,
steal or not steal. Otherwise, in vain were laws,
deliberations, exhortations, counsels, precepts, rewards,
promises, threats and punishments: and God should be the
author of sin. But in spiritual things we will no good, prone
to evil (except we be regenerate, and led by the Spirit), we
are egged on by our natural concupiscence, and there is
ata??a (ataxia,) a confusion in our powers, "Our whole will
is averse from God and his law," not in natural things only,
as to eat and drink, lust, to which we are led headlong by
our temperature and inordinate appetite,
"Nec nos obniti contra, nec tendere tantum
Sufficimus,---
(Virg. "We are neither able to contend against them, nor only
to make way.")
we cannot resist, our concupiscence is originally bad, our
heart evil, the seat of our affections captivates and
enforceth our will. So that in voluntary things we are averse
from God and goodness, bad by nature, by ignorance worse, by
art, discipline, custom, we get many bad habits: suffering
them to domineer and tyrannize over us; and the devil is
still ready at hand with his evil suggestions, to tempt our
depraved will to some ill-disposed action, to precipitate us
to destruction, except our will be swayed and counterpoised
again with some divine precepts, and good motions of the
spirit, which many times restrain, hinder and check us, when
we are in the full career of our dissolute courses. So David
corrected himsel when he had Saul at a vantage. Revenge and
malice were as two violent oppugners on the one side; but
honesty, religion, fear of God, withheld him on the other.

The actions of the will are velle and nolle, to will and
nill: which two words comprehend all, and they are good or
bad, accordingly as they are directed, and some of them
freely performed by himself; although the Stoics absolutely
deny it, and will have all things inevitably done by destiny,
imposing a fatal necessity upon us, which we may not resist;
yet we say that our will is free in respect of us, and things
contingent, howsoever in respect of God's determinate
counsel, they are inevitable and necessary. Some other
actions of the will are performed by the inferior powers,
which obey him, as the sensitive and moving appetite; as to
open our eyes, to go hither and thither, not to touch a book,
to speak fair or foul: but this appetite is many times
rebellious in us, and will not be contained within the lists
of sobriety and temperance. It was (as I said) once well
agreeing with reason, and there was an excellent consent and
harmony between them, but that is now dissolved, they often
jar, reason is overborne by passion: Fertur equis auriga, nec
audit currus habenas, as so many wild horses run away with a
chariot, and will not be curbed. We know many times what is
good, but will not do it, as she said,
"Trahit invitum nova vis, aliudque cupido,
Mens aliud suadet,---"

Lust counsels one thing, reason another, there is a new
reluctancy in men. Odi, nec possum, cupiens, non esse quod
odi. We cannot resist, but as Phaedra confessed to her nurse,
quae loqueris, vera sunt, sed furor suggerit sequi pejora:
she said well and true, she did acknowledge it, but
headstrong passion and fury made her to do that which was
opposite. So David knew the filthiness of his fact, what a
loathsome, foul, crying sin adultery was, yet
notwithstanding, he would commit murder, and take away
another man's wife, enforced against reason, religion, to
follow his appetite. Those natural and vegetal powers are not
commanded by will at all; for "who can add one cubit to his
stature?" These other may, but are not: and thence come all
those headstrong passions, violent perturbations of the mind;
and many times vicious habits, customs, feral diseases;
because wa give so much way to our appetite, and follow our
inclination, like so many beasts. The principal habits are
two in number, virtue and vice, whose peculiar definition;
descriptions, differences, and kinds, are handled at large in
the ethics, and are, indeed, the subject of moral philosophy.



MEMB. III.

SUBSECT. I.-- Definition of Melancholy, Name, Difference.


HAVING thus briefly anatomized the body and soul of man, as a
preparative to the rest; I may now freely proceed to treat of
my intended object, to most men's capacity; and after many
ambages, perspicuously define what this melancholy is, show
his name and differences. The name is imposed from the
matter, and disease denominated from the material cause: as
Bruel observes, Me?a?????a (Melancholia) quasi Me?a??a ????
(melaina chole) from black choler. And whether it be a cause
or an effect, a disease or symptom, let Donatus Altomarus and
Salvianus decide; I will not contend about it. It hath
several descriptions, notations, and definitions.
Fracastorius, in his second book of intellect, calls those
melancholy, "whom abundance of that same depraved humour of
black choler hath so misaffected, that they become mad
thence, and dote in most things, or in all, belonging to
election, will, or other manifest operations of the
understanding." Melanelius out of Galen, Ruffus, Aetius,
describe it to be "a bad and peevish disease, which makes men
degenerate into beasts:" Galen, "a privation or infection of
the middle cell of the head," &c. defining it from the part
affected, which Hercules de Saxonia approves, lib. 1. cap.
16. calling it "a depravation of the principal function:"
Fuschius, lib. 1. cap. 23. Arnoldus Breviar. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Guianerius, and others: "By reason of black choler," Paulus
adds. Halyabbas simply calls it a "commotion of the mind."
Aretaeus, "a perpetual anguish of the soul, fastened on one
thing, without an ague;" which definition of his, Mercurialis
de affect. cap. lib. 1. cap. 10. taxeth: but Aelianus
Montaltus defends, lib. de morb. cap. 1. de Melan. for
sufficient and good. The common sort define it to be "a kind
of dotage without a fever, having for his ordinary
companions, fear and sadness, without any apparent occasion".
So doth Laurentius, cap. 4. Piso, lib. 1. cap. 43. Donatus
Altomarus, cap. 7. art. medic. Jacchinus, in com. in lib. 9.
Rhasis ad Almansor, cap. 15. Valesius exerc. 17. Fuschius,
institut. 3. sec. 1. c. 11. &c., which common definition,
howsoever approved by most, Hercules de Saxonia will not
allow of, nor David Crucius, Theat. morb. Herm. lib. 2. cap.
6. he holds it insufficient: "as rather showing what it is
not, than what it is:" as omitting the specific difference,
the phantasy and brain: but I descend to particulars. The
summum genus is "dotage, or anguish of the mind," saith
Aretaeus; "of the principal parts," Hercules de Saxonia adds,
to distinguish it from cramp and palsy, and such diseases as
belong to the outward sense and motions [depraved] to
distinguish it from folly and madness (which Montaltus makes
angor animi, to separate) in which those functions are not
depraved, but rather abolished; [without an ague] is added by
all, to separate it from phrensy, and that melancholy which
is in a pestilent fever. (Fear and sorrow) make it differ
from madness: [without a cause] is lastly inserted, to
specify it from all other ordinary passions of [fear and
sorrow]. We properly call that dotage, as Laurentius
interprets it, "when some one principal faculty of the mind,
as imagination, or reason, is corrupted, as all melancholy
persons have." It is without a fever, because the humour is
most part cold and dry, contrary to putrefaction. Fear and
sorrow are the true characters and inseparable companions of
most melancholy, not all, as Her. de Saxonia, Tract. de
posthumo de Melancholia, cap. 2. well excepts; for to some it
is most pleasant, as to such as laugh most part; some are
bold again, and free from all manner of fear and grief; as
hereafter shall be declared.



SUBSECT. II.-- Of the Part affected. Affection. Parties
affected.


SOME difference I find amongst writers, about the principal
part affected in this disease, whether it be the brain, or
heart, or some other member. Most are of opinion that it is
the brain: for being a kind of dotage, it cannot otherwise be
but that the brain must be affected, as a similar part, be it
by consent or essence, not in his ventricles, or any
obstructions in them, for then it would be an apoplexy, or
epilepsy, as Laurentius well observes, but in a cold, dry
distemperature of it in his substance. which is corrupt and
become too cold, or too dry, or else too hot, as in madmen,
and such as are inclined to it: and this Hippocrates
confirms, Galen, the Arabians, and most of our new writers.
Marcus de Oddis (in a consultation of his, quoted by
Hildesheim) and five others there cited are of the contrary
part; because fear and sorrow, which are passions, be seated
in the heart. But this objection is sufficiently answered by
Montaltus, who doth not deny that the heart is affected (as
Melanelius proves out of Galen) by reason of his vicinity,
and so is the midriff and many other parts. They do compati,
and have a fellow feeling by the law of nature: but forasmuch
as this malady is caused by precedent imagination, with the
appetite, to whom spirits obey, and are subject to those
principal parts, the brain must needs primarily be
misaffected, as the seat of reason; aad then the heart, as
the seat of affection. Cappivaccius and Mercurialis have
copiously discussed this question, and both conclude the
subject is the inner brain, and from thence it is
communicated to the heart and other inferior parts, which
sympathize and are much troubled, especially when it comes by
consent, and is caused by reason of the stomach, or myrach,
as the Arabians term it, whole body, liver, or spleen, which
are seldom free, pylorus, meseraic veins, &c. For our body is
like a clock, if one wheel be amiss, all the rest are
disordered; the whole fabric suffers: with such admirable art
and harmony is a man composed, such excellent proportion, as
Ludovicus Vives in his Fable of Man hath elegantly declared.

As many doubts almost arise about the affection, whether it
be imagination or reason alone, or both, Hercules de Saxonia
proves it out of Galen, Aetius and Altomarus, that the sole
fault is in imagination. Bruel is of the same mind: Montaltus
in his 2 cap. of Melancholy confutes this tenet of theirs,
and illustrates the contrary by many examples: as of him that
thought himself a shell-fish, of a nun, and of a desperate
monk that would not be persuaded but that he was damned;
reason was in fault as well as imagination, which did not
correct this error: they make away themselves oftentimes, and
suppose many absurd and ridiculous things. Why doth not
reason detect the fallacy, settle and persuade, if she be
free? Avicenna therefore holds both corrupt, to whom most
Arabians subscribe. The same is maintained by Areteus,
Gorgonius, Guianerius. &c. To end the controversy, no man
doubts of imagination, but that it is hurt and misaffected
here; for the other, I determine with Albertinus Bottonus, a
doctor of Padua, that it is first in "imagination, and
afterwards in reason; if the disease be inveterate, or as it
is more or less of continuance; but by accident" as Herc. de
Saxonia adds; "faith, opinion, discourse, ratiocination, are
all accidentally depraved by the default of imagination."

Parties affected.] To the part affected, I may here add the
parties, which shall be more opportunely spoken of elsewhere,
now only signifieth. Such as have the moon, Saturn, Mercury
misaffected in their genitures, such as live in over cold, or
over hot climes: such as are born of melancholy parents; as
offend in those six non-natural things, are black, or of a
high sanguine complexion, that have little heads, that have a
hot heart, moist brain, hot liver and cold stomach, have been
long sick: such as are solitary by nature, great students,
given to much contemplation, lead a life out of action, are
most subject to melancholy. Of sexes both, but men more
often; yet women misaffected are far more violent, and
grievously troubled. Of seasons of the year, the autumn is
most melancholy. Of peculiar times: old age, from which
natural melancholy is almost an inseparable accident; but
this artificial malady is more frequent in such as are of a
middle age. Some assign 40 years, Gariopontus 30. Jubertus
excepts neither young nor old from this adventitious. Daniel
Sennertus involves all of all sorts, out of common
experience, in omnibus omnino corporibus cujuscunque
constionis dominatur. Aetius and Aretius ascribe into the
number "not only discontented, passionate, and miserable
persons, swarthy, black; but such as are most merry and
pleasant, scoffers, and high coloured." "Generally," saith
Rhasis, "the finest wits and most generous spirits, are
before other obnoxious to it;" I cannot except any
complexion, any condition, sex, or age, but fools and Stoics,
which, according to Synesius, are never troubled with any
manner of passion, but as Anacreon's cicada, sine sanguine et
dolore; similes fere diis sunt. Erasmus vindicates fools from
this melancholy catalogue, because they have most part moist
brains and light hearts; they are free from ambition, envy,
shame and fear; they are neither troubled in conscience, nor
macerated with cares, to which our whole life is most
subject.



SUBSECT. III.-- Of the Matter of Melancholy.


OF the matter of melancholy, there is much question betwixt
Avicen and Galen, as you may read in Cardan's Contradictious,
Valesius' Controversies, Montanus, Prosper Calenus,
Cappivaccius, Bright, Ficinus, that have written either whole
tracts, or copiously of it, in their several treatises of
this subject. "What this humour is, or whence it proceeds,
how it is engendered in the body, neither Galen, nor any old
writer, hath sufficiently discussed, as Jacchiuus thinks: the
Neoterics cannot agree. Montanus, in his Consultations, holds
melancholy to be material or immaterial: and so doth
Arculanus: the material is one of the four humours before
mentioned, and natural. The immaterial or adventitious,
acquisite, redundant, unnatural, artificial; which  Hercules
de Saxonia will have reside in the spirits alone, and to
proceed from a "hot, cold, dry, moist distemperature, which,
without matter, alter the brain and functions of it."
Paracelsus wholly rejects and derides this division of four
humours and complexions, but our Galenists generally approve
of it, subscribing to this opinion of Montanus.

This material melancholy is either simple or mixed; offending
in quantity or quality, varying according to his place, where
it settleth, as brain, spleen, meseraic veins, heart, womb,
and stomach; or differing according to the mixture of those
natural humours amongst themselves, or four unnatural adust
humours, as they are diversely tempered and mingled. If
natural melancholy abound in the body, which is cold and dry,
"so that it be more than the body is well able to bear, it
must needs be distempered," saith Faventius, "and diseased;"
and so the other, if it be depraved, whether it arise from
that other melancholy of choler adust, or from blood,
produceth the like effects, and is, as Montaltus contends, if
it come by adustion of humours, most part hot and dry. Some
difference I find, whether this melancholy matter may be
engendered of all four humours, about the colour and temper
of it. Galen holds it may be engendered of three alone,
excluding phlegm, or pituita, whose true assertion Valesius
and Menardus stiffly maintain, and so doth Fuschius,
Montaltus, Montanus. How (say they) can white become black?
But Hercules de Saxonia, lib. post. de mela. c. 8, and Cardan
are of the opposite part (it may be engendered of phlegm,
etsi raro contingat, though it seldom come to pass), so is
Guianerius and Laurentius, c.1. with Melanct. in his Book de
Anima, and Chap. of Humours; he calls it Asininam, dull,
swinish melancholy, and saith that he was an eye-witness of
it: so is Wecker. From melancholy adust ariseth one kind;
from choler another, which is most brutish; another from
phlegm, which is dull; and the last from blood, which is
best. Of these some are cold and dry, others hot and dry,
varying according to their mixtures, as they are intended,
and remitted. And indeed as Rodericus a Fons. cons. 12. 1.
determines, ichors, and those serous matters being thickened
become phlegm, and phlegm degenerates into choler, choler
adust becomes aeruginosa melancholia, as vinegar out of
purest wine putrefied or by exhalation of purer spirits is so
made, and becomes sour and sharp; and from the sharpness of
this humour proceeds much waking, troublesome thoughts and
dreams, &c. so that I conclude as before. If the humour be
cold, it is, saith Faventinus, "a cause of dotage, and
produceth milder symptoms: if hot, they are rash, raving mad,
or inclining to it." If the brain be hot, the animal spirits
are hot; much madness follows, with violent actions: if cold,
fatuity and sottishness, Cappivaccius. The colour of this
mixture varies likewise according to the mixture, be it hot
or cold; 'tis sometimes black, sometimes not, Altomarus. The
same Melanelius proves out of Galen; and Hippocrates in his
Book of Melancholy (if at least it be his), giving instance
in a burning coal, "which when it is hot, shines; when it is
cold, looks black; and so doth the humour." This diversity of
melancholy matter produceth diversity of effects. If it be
within the body, and not putrefied, it causeth black
jaundice; if putrefied, a quartan ague; if it break out to
the skin, leprosy; if to parts, several maladies, as scurvy,
&c. If it trouble the mind; as it is diversely mixed, it
produceth several kinds of madness and dotage: of which in
their place.



SUBSECT. IV.-- Of the species or kinds of Melancholy.


WHEN the matter is divers and confused, how should it
otherwise be, but that the species should be divers and
confused? Many new and old writers have spoken confusedly of
it, confounding melancholy and madness, as Heurthus,
Guianerius, Gordonius, Salustius, Salvianus, Jason Pratensis,
Savanarola, that will have madness no other than melancholy
in extent, differing (as I have said) in degrees. Some make
two distinct species, as Ruffus Ephesius, an old writer,
Constantinus Africanus, Aretaeus, Aurelianus, Paulus
Aegineta: others acknowledge a multitude of kinds, and leave
them indefinite, as Aetius in his Tetrabiblos, Avicenna, lib.
3 Fen. 1 Tract. 4 cap. 18. Arculanus, cap. 16. in 9. Rasis,
Montanus, med. part. 1. "If natural melancholy be adust, it
maketh one kind; if blood, another; if choler, a third,
differing from the first; and so many several opinions there
are about the kinds, as there be men themselves." Hercules de
Saxonia sets down two kinds, "material and immaterial; one
from spirits alone, the other from humours and spirits."
Savanarola, Rub. 11. Tract. 6. cap. 1. de aegritud. capitis,
will have the kinds to be infinite; one from the myrach,
called myrachialis of the Arabians; another stomachalis, from
the stomach; another from the liver, heart, womb, hemrods:
"one beginning, another consummate." Melancthon seconds him,
"as the humour is diversely adust and mixed, so are the
species divers;" but what these men speak of species I think
ought to be understood of symptoms, and so doth Arculanus
interpret himself: infinite species, id est, symptoms; and in
that sense, as Jo. Gorrheus acknowledgeth in his medicinal
definitions, the species are infinite, but they may be
reduced to three kinds by reason of their seat; head, body,
and hypochondries. This threefold division is approved by
Hippocrates in his Book of Melancholy (if it be his, which
some suspect), by  Galen, lib. 3. de loc. affectis, cap. 6.,
by Alexander, lib. 1. cap. 16., Rasis, lib. 1. Continent.
Tract. 9. lib. 1. cap. 16., Avicenna, and most of our new
writers. Th. Erastus makes two kinds; one perpetual, which is
head melancholy; the other interrupt, which comes and goes by
fits, which he subdivides into the other two kinds, so that
all comes to the same pass. Some again make four or five
kinds, with Rodericus a Castro, de morbis mulier. lib. 2.
cap. 3., and Lod. Mercatus, who, in his second book de
mulier. affect. cap. 4., will have that melancholy of nuns,
widows, and more ancient maids, to be a peculiar species of
melancholy differing from the rest: some will reduce
enthusiasts, extatical and demoniacal persons to this rank,
adding love melancholy to the first, and lycanthropia. The
most received division is into three kinds. The first
proceeds from the sole fault of the brain, and is called head
melancholy; the second sympathetically proceeds from the
whole body when the whole temperature is melancholy: the
third ariseth from the bowels, liver, spleen, or membrane,
called mesenterium, named hypochondriacal or windy
melancholy, which Laurentius subdivides into three parts,
from those three members, hepatic, splenetic, meseraic. Love
melancholy, which Avicenna calls Ilisha: and Lycanthropia,
which he calls cucubuthe, are commonly included in head
melancholy; but of this last, which Gerardus de Solo calls
amoreus, and most knight melancholy, with that of religious
melancholy, virginum et viduarum, maintained by Rod. a Castro
and Mercatus, and the other kinds of love melancholy, I will
speak of apart by themselves in my third partition. The three
precedent species are the subject of my present discourse,
which I will anatomize and treat of through all their causes,
symptoms, cures, together and apart; that every man that is
in any measure affected with this malady, may know how to
examine it in himself; and apply remedies unto it.

It is a hard matter, I confess, to distinguish these three
species one from the other, to express their several causes,
symptoms, cures, being that they are so often confounded
amongst themselves, having such affinity, that they can
scarce be discerned by the most accurate physicians; and so
often intermixed with other diseases that the best
experienced have been plunged. Montanus consil. 26, names a
patient that had this disease of melancholy and caninus
appetitus both together; and consil. 23, with vertigo, Julius
Caesar Claudinus, with stone, gout, jaundice. Trincarellius
with an ague, jaundice, caninus appetitus, &c. Paulus
Regoline, a great doctor in his time, consulted in this case,
was so confounded with a confusion of symptoms, that he knew
not to what kind of melancholy to refer it. Trincavellius,
Fallopius, and Francanzanus, famous doctors in Italy, all
three conferred with about one party, at the same time, gave
three different opinions. And in another place, Trincavellius
being demanded what he thought of a melancholy young man to
whom he was sent for, ingenuously confessed that he was
indeed melancholy, but he knew not to what kind to reduce it.
In his seventeenth consultation there is the like
disagreement about a melancholy monk. Those symptoms, which
others ascribe to misaffected parts and humours, Herc. de
Saxonia attributes wholly to distempered spirits, and those
immaterial, as I have said. Sometimes they cannot well
discern this disease from others. In Reinerus Solinander's
counsels, (Sect. consil. 5.) he and Dr. Brande both agreed,
that the patient's disease was hypochondriacal melancholy.
Dr. Matholdus said it was asthma, and nothing else.
Solinander and Guarionius, lately sent for to the melancholy
Duke of Cleve, with others, could not define what species it
was, or agree amongst themselves. The species are so
confounded, as in Caesar Claudinus his forty-fourth
consultation for a Polonian Count, in his judgment "he
laboured of head melancholy, and that which proceeds from the
whole temperature both at once." I could give instance of
some that have had all three kinds semel et simul, and some
successively. So that I conclude of our melancholy species as
many politicians do of their pure forms of commonwealths,
monarchies, aristocracies, democracies, are most famous in
contemplation, but in practice they are temperate and usually
mixed, (so Polybius informeth us) as the Lacedaemonian, the
Roman of old, German now, and many others. What physicians
say of distinct species in their books it much matters not,
since that in their patients' bodies they are commonly mixed.
In such obscurity, therefore, variety and confused mixture of
symptoms, causes, how difficult a thing is it to treat of
several kinds apart; to make any certainty or distinction
among so many casualties, distractions, when seldom two men
shall be like affected per omnia? 'Tis hard, I confess, yet
nevertheless I will adventure through the midst of these
perplexities, and, led by the clue or thread of the best
writers, extricate myself out of a labyrinth of doubts and
errors, and so proceed to the causes.



SECT. II. MEMB. I.

SUBSECT. I.-- Causes of Melancholy. God a cause.

"IT is in vain to speak of cures, or think of remedies, until
such time as we have considered of the causes," so Galen
prescribes Glauco: and the common experience of others
confirms that those cures must be imperfect, lame, and to no
purpose, wherein the causes have not first been searched, as
Prosper Calenius well observes in his tract de atra bile to
Cardinal Caisius. Insomuch that "Fernelius puts a kind of
necessity in the knowledge of the causes, and without which
it is impossible to cure or prevent any manner of disease."
Empirics may ease, and sometimes help, but not thoroughly
root out; sublata causa tollitur effectus, as the saying is,
if the cause be removed, the effect is likewise vanquished.
It is a most difficult thing (I confess) to be able to
discern these causes, whence they are, and in such variety to
say what the beginning was. He is happy that can perform it
aright. I will adventure to guess as near as I can, and rip
them all up, from the first to the last, general and
particular, to every species, that so they may the better be
descried.

General causes, are either supernatural, or natural.
"Supernatural are from God and his angels, or by God's
permission from the devil" and his ministers. That God
himself is a cause for the punishment of sin, and
satisfaction of his justice, many examples and testimonies of
holy Scriptures make evident unto us, Ps. cvii. 17. "Foolish
men are plagued for their offence, and by reason of their
wickedness." Gehazi was strucken with leprosy, 2 Reg. v. 27.
Jehoram with dysentery and flux, and great diseases of the
bowels, 2 Chron. xxi. 1.5. David plagued for numbering his
people, 1 Par. 21. Sodom and Gomorrah swallowed up. And this
disease is peculiarly specified, Psalm cxxvii. 12. "He
brought down their heart through heaviness." Deut. xxviii 23.
"He struck them with madness, blindness, and astonishment of
heart." "An evil spirit was sent by the Lord upon Saul, to
vex him." Nebuchadnezzar did eat grass like an ox, and "his
heart was made like the beasts of the field." Heathen stories
are full of such punishments. Lycurgus, because he cut down
the vines in the country, was by Bacchus driven into madness:
so was Pentheus and his mother Agave for neglecting their
sacrifice. Censor Fulvius ran mad for untiling Juno's temple,
to cover a new one of his own, which he had dedicated to
Fortune, "and was confounded to death, with grief and sorrow
of heart." When Xerxes would have spoiled Apollo's temple at
Delphos of those infinite riches it possessed, a terrible
thunder came from heaven and struck four thousand men dead,
the rest ran mad. A little after, the like happened to
Brennus, lightning, thunder, earthquakes, upon such a
sacrilegious occasion. If we may believe our pontifical
writers, they will relate unto us many strange and prodigious
punishments in this kind, inflicted by their saints. How
Clodoveus, sometime King of France, the son of Dagobert, lost
his wits for uncovering the body of St. Denis: and how a
sacrilegious Frenchman, that would have stolen a silver image
of St. John, at Birgburge, became frantic on a sadden,
raging, and tyrannising over his own flesh: of a Lord of
Rhadnor, that coming from hunting late at night, put his dogs
into St. Avan's church, (Llan Avan they called it) and rising
betimes next morning, as hunters use to do, found all his
dogs mad, himself being suddenly stricken blind. Of Tyridates
an Armenian king, for violating some holy nuns, that was
punished in like sort, with loss of his wits. But poets and
papists may go togther for fabulous tales; let them free
their own credits: howsoever they feign of their Nemesis, and
of their saints, or by the devil's means may be deluded; we
find it true, that ultor a tergo Deus, "He is God the
avenger," as David styles him; and that it is our crying sins
that pull this and many other maladies on our own heads. That
he can by his angels, which are his ministers, strike and
heal (saith Dionysius) whom he will; that he can plague us by
his creatures, sun, moon, and stars, which he useth as his
instruments, as a husbandman (saith Zanchius) doth a hatchet:
hail, snow, winds, &c. "Et conjurati veniunt in classica
venti:" as in Joshua's time, as in Pharaoh's reign in Egypt;
they are but as so many executioners of his justice. He can
make the proudest spirits stoop, and cry out with Julian the
apostate, Vicisti, Galilae: or with Apollo's priest in
Chrysostom, O caelum! O terra! unde hostis hic? What an enemy
is this? And pray with David, acknowledging his power, "I am
weakened and sore broken, I roar for the grief of mine heart,
mine heart panteth," &c. Psalm xxxviii. 8. "O Lord rebuke me
not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath," Psalm
xxxviii. 1. "Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones
which thou hast broken, may rejoice," Psalm ii. 8; and verse
12, "Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me
with thy free spirit." For these causes belike Hippocrates
would have a physician take special notice whether the
disease come not from a divine supernatural cause, or whether
it follow the course of nature. But this is farther discussed
by Fran. Valerius de sacr. philos: cap. 8. Fernelius, and J.
Caesar Claudinus, to whom I refer you, how this place of
Hippocrates is to be understood. Paracelsus is of opinion,
that such spiritual diseases (for so he calls them) are
spiritually to be cured, and not otherwise. Ordinary means in
such cases will not avail: Non est reluctandum cum Deo (we
must not struggle with God). When that monster-taming
Hercules overcame all in the Olympics, Jupiter at last in an
unknown shape wrestled with him; the victory was uncertain,
till at length Jupiter descried himself; and Hercules
yielded. No striving with supreme powers. Nil juvat immensos
Cratero promittere montes, physicians and physic can do no
good, "we must submit ourselves unto the mighty hand of God,"
acknowledge our offences, call to him for mercy. If he strike
us, una eademque manus vulnus opemque feret, as it is with
them that are wounded with the spear of Achilles, he alone
must help; otherwise our diseases are incurable, and we not
to be relieved.



SUBSECT. II.-- A Digression of the nature of Spirits, bad
Angels, or Devils, and how they cause Melancholy.


How far the power of spirits and devils doth extend, and
whether they can cause this, or any other disease, is a
serious question, and worthy to be considered: for the better
understanding of which, I will make a brief digression of the
nature of spirits. And although the question be very obscure,
according to Postellus, "full of controversy and ambiguity,"
beyond the reach of human capacity, fateor excedere vires
intentionis meae, saith  Austin, I confess I am not able to
understand it, finitum de infinito non potest statuere, we
can sooner determine with Tully de nat. deorum, quid non sint
quam quid sint, our subtle schoolmen, Cardans, Scaligers,
profound Thomists, Fracastoriana and Ferneliana acies, are
weak, dry, obscure, defective in these mysteries, and all our
quickest wits, as an owl's eyes at the sun's light, wax dull,
and are not sufficient to apprehend them; yet, as in the
rest, I will adventure to say something to this point. In
former times, as we read Acts xxiii, the Sadducees denied
that there were any such spirits, devils, or angels. So did
Galen the physician, the Peripatetics, even Aristotle himself
as Pomponatius stoutly maintains,and Scaliger in some sort
grants. Though Dandinus the Jesuit, com. in lib. 2. de anima,
stiffly denies it; substantiae separatae and intelligences,
are the same which Christians call angels, and Platonists
devils, for they name all the spirits, daemones, be they good
or bad angels, as Julius Pollux Onomasticon, lib. 1. cap. 1.
observes. Epicures and atheists are of the same mind in
general, because they never saw them. Plato, Plotinus,
Porphyrius, Jamblichus, Proclus, insisting in the steps of
Trismegistus, Pythagoras and Socrates, make no doubt of it:
nor Stoics, but that there are such spirits, though much
erring from the truth. Concerning the first beginning of
them, the Talmudists say that Adam had a wife called Lilis,
before he married Eve, and of her he begat nothing but
devils. The Turks' Alcoran is altogether as absurd and
ridiculous in this point: but the Scripture informs us
Christians, how Lucifer, the chief of them, with his
associates, fell from heaven for his pride and ambition;
created of God, placed in heaven, and sometimes an angel of
light, now cast down into the lower aerial sublunary parts,
or into hell, "and delivered into chains of darkness (2 Pet.
ii. 4.), to be kept unto damnation."

Nature of Devils.] There is a foolish opinion which some
hold, that they are the souls of men departed, good and more
noble were deified, the baser grovelled on the ground, or in
the lower parts, and were devils, the which with Tertullian,
Porphyrius the philosopher, M. Tyrius ser. 27 maintains.
"These spirits," he saith, "which we call angels and devils,
are nought but souls of men departed, which either through
love and pity of their friends yet living, help and assist
them, or else persecute their enemies, whom they hated," as
Dido threatened to persecute Aeneas:

Omnibus umbra locis adebo: dabis, improbe, poenas."
"My angry ghost arising from the deep,
Shall haunt thee waking, and disturb thy sleep;
At least my shade thy punishment shall know,
And Fame shall spread the pleasing news below."

They are (as others suppose) appointed by those higher powers
to keep men from their nativity, and to protect or punish
them as they see cause: and are called boni et mali Genii by
the Romans. Heroes, lares, if good, lemures or larvae if bad,
by the Stoics, governors of countries, men, cities, saith
Apuleius, Deos appellant qui ex hominum numero justa ac
prudenter vitae curriculo gubernato, pro numine, postea ab
hominibus praediti fanis et ceremoniis vulgo admittuntur, ut
in Aegypto Osyris, &c. (All those mortals are called gods,
who, the course of life being prudently guided and governed,
are honoured by men with temples and sacrifices, as Osiris in
Aegypt, &c.) Praestites, Capella calls them, "which protected
particular men as well as princes," Socrates had his
Daemonium Saturninum et ignium, which of all spirits is best,
ad sublimes cogitationes animum erigentem, as the Platonists
supposed; Plotinus his, and we Christians our assisting
angel, as Andreas Victorellus, a copious writer of this
subject, Lodovicus de La-Cerda, the Jesuit, in his voluminous
tract de Angelo Custode, Zanchius, and some divines think.
But this absurd tenet of Tyreus, Proclus confutes at large in
his book de Anima et daeemone.

Psellus, a Christian, and sometimes tutor (saith Cuspinian)
to Michael Parapinatius, Emperor of Greece, a great observer
of the nature of devils, holds they are corporeal, and have
"aerial bodies, that they are mortal, live and die," (which
Martianus Capella likewise maintains, but our christian
philosophers explode) "that they are nourished and have
excrements, they feel pain if they be hurt (which Cardan
confirms, and Scaliger justly laughs him to scorn for; Si
pascantur aere, cur non pugnant ob puriorem aera? &c.) or
stroken:" and if their bodies be cut, with admirable celerity
they come together again. Austin, in Gen. lib. iii. lib.
arbit, approves as much, mutata casu corpora in deteriorem
qualitatem aeris spissioris, so doth Hierome. Comment. in
epist. ad Ephes. cap. 3, Origen, Tertullian, Lactantius, and
many ancient fathers of the Church: that in their fall their
bodies were changed into a more aerial and gross substance.
Bodine, lib. 4, Theatri Naturaae, and David Crusius,
Hermeticae Philosophae, lib. 1. cap. 4, by several arguments
proves angels and spirits to be corporeal: quicquid
continetur in loco Corporeus est; At spiritus continetur in
loco, ergo. Si spiritus sunt quanti, erunt Corporei: At sunt
quanti, ergo. Sunt finiti, ergo quanti, &c. (Whatever
occupies space is corporeal:-- spirit occupies space,
therefore, &c. &c.) Bodine goes farther yet, and will have
these, Animae separatae genii, spirits, angels, devils, and
so likewise souls of men departed, if corporeal (which he
most eagerly contends) to be of some shape, and that
absolutely round, like Sun and Moon, because that is the most
perfect form, quae nihil habet asperitatis, nihil angulis
incisum, nihil anfractibus involutum, nihil eminens, sed
inter corpora perfecta est perfectissimum; (Which has no
roughness, angles, fractures, prominences, but is the most
perfect amongst perfect bodies.) Therefore all spirits are
corporeal he concludes, and in their proper shapes round.
That they can assume other aerial bodies, all manner of
shapes at their pleasures, appear in what likeness they will
themselves, that they are most swift in motion, can pass many
miles in an instant, and so likewise transform bodies of
others into what shape they please, and with admirable
celerity remove them from place to place (as the Angel did
Habakkuk to Daniel, and as Philip the deacon was carried away
by the Spirit, when he had baptised the eunuch; so did
Pythagoras and Apollonius remove themselves and others with
many such feats); that they can represent castles in the air,
palaces, armies, spectrums, prodigies, and such strange
objects to mortal men's eyes, cause smells, savours, &c.,
deceive all the senses; most writers of this subject credibly
believe; and that they can foretel future events, and do many
strange miracles. Juno's image spake to Camillus, and
Fortune's statue to the Roman matrons, with many such.
Zanchius, Bodine, Spondanus, and others, are of opinion that
they cause a true metamorphosis, as Nebuchadnezzar was really
translated into a beast, Lot's wife into a pillar of salt;
Ulysses' companions into hogs and dogs, by Circe's charms;
turn themselves and others, as they do witches into cats,
dogs, hares, crows, &c. Strozzius Cicogna hath many examples,
lib. iii. omnif. mag. cap. 4 and 5, which he there confutes,
as Austin likewise doth, de civ. Dei lib. xviii. That they
can be seen when and in what shape, and to whom they will,
saith Psellus, Taletsi nil tale viderim, nec optem videre,
though he himself never saw them nor desired it; and use
sometimes carnal copulation (as elsewhere I shall prove more
at large) with women and men. Many will not believe they can
be seen, and if any man shall say, swear, and stiffly
maintain, though he be discreet and wise, judicious and
learned, that he hath seen them, they account him a timorous
fool, a melancholy dizzard, a weak fellow, a dreamer, a sick
or a mad man, they contemn him, laugh him to scorn, and yet
Marcus of his credit told Psellus that he had often seen
them. And Leo Suavius, a Frenchman, c. 8, in Commentar. l. 1.
Paracelsus de vita longa, out of some Platonists, will have
the air to be as full of them as snow falling in the skies,
and that they may be seen, and withal sets down the means how
men may see them; Si irreverberatis oculis sole splendente
versus coelum  continuaverint obtutus, &c. (By gazing
steadfastly on the sun illuminated with his brightest rays.),
and saith moreover he tried it, praemissorum feci
experimentum, and it was true, that the Platonists said.
Paracelsus confesseth that he saw them divers times, and
conferred with them, and so doth Alexander ab Alexandro,
"that he so found it by experience, when as before he doubted
of it." Many deny it, saith Lavater de spectris, part i. c.
2, and part ii. c. 11, "because they never saw them
themselves;" but as he reports at large all over his book,
especially c. 19, part l. they are often seen and heard, and
familiarly converse with men, as Lod. Vives assureth us,
innumerable records, histories, and testimonies evince in all
ages, times, places, and all travellers besides; in the West
Indies and our northern climes, Nihil familiarus quam in
agris et urbibus spiritus videre, audire qui vetent, jubeant,
&c. Hieronymus vita Pauli, Basil ser. 40, Nidephorus,
Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomenus, Jacobus Boissardus in his
tract de spirituum apparitionibus, Petrus Loyerus 1. de
spectris, Wierus 1. 1. have infinite variety of such examples
of apparitions of spirits, for him to read that farther
doubts, to his ample satisfaction. One alone I will briefly
insert. A nobleman in Germany was sent ambassador to the King
of Sweden (for his name, the time, and such circumstances, I
refer you to Boissardus, mine author). After he had done his
business, he sailed to Livonia, on set purpose to see those
familiar spirits, which are there said to be conversant with
men, and do their drudgery works. Amongst other matters, one
of them told him where his wife was, in what room, in what
clothes, what doing, and brought him a ring from her, which,
at his return, non sine omnium admiratione, he found to be
true; and so believed that ever after, which before he
doubted of. Cardan l. 19. de subtil. relates of his father,
Facius Cardan, that after the accustomed solemnities, An.
1491, 13 August, he conjured up seven devils, in Greek
apparel, about forty years of age, some ruddy of complexion,
and some pale, as he thought; he asked them many questions,
and they made ready answer, that they were aerial devils,
that they lived and died as men did, save that they were far
longer lived (700 or 800 years); they did as much excel men
in dignity as we do juments, and were as far excelled again
of those that were above them; our governors and keepers they
are moreover, which Plato in Critias delivered of old, and
subordinate to one another, Ut enim homo homini, sic daemon
daemoni dominatur, they rule themselves as well as us, and
the spirits of the meaner sort had commonly such offices, as
we make horse-keepers, neat-herds, and the basest of us,
overseers of our cattle; and that we can no more apprehend
their natures and functions, than a horse a man's. They knew
all things, but might not reveal them to man; and ruled and
domineered over us, as we do over our horses; the best kings
among us, and the most generous spirits, were not comparable
to the basest of them. Sometimes they did instruct men, and
communicate their skill, reward and cherish, and sometimes,
again, terrify and punish, to keep them in awe, as they
thought fit, Nihil magis cupientes (saith Lysius, Phis.
Stoicorum) quam adorationem homininum (coveting nothing more
than the admiration of mankind.) The same Author, Cardan, in
his Hyperchen, out of the doctrine of Stoics, will have some
of these Genii (for so he calls them) to be desirous of men's
company, very affable and familiar with them, as dogs are;
others, again, to abhor as serpents, and care not for them.
The same belike Tritemius calls Ignios et sublunares, qui
nunquam demergunt ad inferiora, aut vix ullum habbent in
terris commercium: Generally they far excel men in worth, as
a man the meanest worm; though some of them are inferior to
those of their own rank in worth, as the blackguard in a
prince's court, and to men again, as some degenerate, base,
rational creatures, are excelled of brute beasts."

That they are mortal, besides these testimonies of Cardan,
Martianus, &c., many other divines and philosophers hold,
post prolixum tempus moriuntur omnes; The Platonists, and
some Rabbins, Porphyrius and Plutarch, as appears by that
relation of Thamus: "The great god Pan is dead;" Apollo
Pythius ceased; and so the rest. St. Hierome, in the life of
Paul the Hermit, tells a story how one of them appeared to
St. Anthony in the wilderness, and told him as much.
Paracelsus of our late writers stiffly maintains that they
are mortal, live and die as other creatures do. Zozimus, 1.2,
further adds, that religion and policy dies and alters with
them. The Gentiles' gods, he saith, were expelled by
Constantine, and together with them, Imperii Romani majestas,
et fortuna interiit, et profligata est; The fortune and
majesty of the Roman Empire decayed and vanished, as that
heathen in Minutius formerly bragged when the Jews were
overcome by the Romans, the Jews' God was likewise captivated
by that of Rome; and Rabsakeh to the Israelite; no God should
deliver them out of the hands of the Assyrians. But these
paradoxes of their power, corporeity, mortality, taking of
shapes, transposing bodies, and carnal copulations, are
sufficiently confuted by Zanch. c. 10, l. 4. Pererius in his
comment, and Tostatus questions on the 6th of Gen. Th.
Aquin., St. Austin, Wierus, Th. Erastus, Delrio, tom. 2, l.
2, quaest. 29; Sebastian Michaelis, c. 2, de spiritibus, D.
Reinolds Lect. 47. They may deceive the eyes of men, yet not
take true bodies, or make a real metamorphosis; but as
Cicogna proves at large, they are Illusoriae et
praestigiatrices tranformationes, omnif. mag. lib. 4, cap. 4,
mere illusions and cozenings, like that tale of Pasetis
obulus in Suidas, or that of Autolicus, Mercury's son, that
dwelt in Parnassus, who got so much treasure by cozenage and
stealth. His father Mercury, because he could leave him no
wealth, taught him many fine tricks to get means, for he
could drive away men's cattle, and if any pursued him, turn
them into what shapes he would, and so did mightily enrich
himself, hoc astu maximam praedam est adsecutus. This, no
doubt, is as true as the rest; yet thus much in general.
Thomas, Durand, and others, grant that they have
understanding far beyond men, can probably conjecture and
foretel many things; they can cause and cure most diseases,
deceive our senses; they have excellent skill in all Arts aid
Sciences; and that the most illiterate devil is Quovis homine
scientior (more knowing than any man), as Cicogna maintains
out of others. They know the virtues of herbs, plants,
stones, minerals, &c.; of all creatures, birds, beasts, the
four elements, stars, planets, can aptly apply and make use
of them as they see good; perceiving the causes of all
meteors, ad the like: Dant se coloribus (as Austin hath it)
accommodant se figuris, adhaerent sonis, subjiciunt se
odoribus, infundunt se saporibus, omnes sensus etiam ipsam
inteligentiam daemones fallunt, they deceive all our senses,
even our understanding itself at once. They can produce
miraculous alterations in the air, and most wonderful
effects, conquer armies, give victories, help, further, hurt,
cross and alter human attempts and projects (Dei permissu) as
they see good themselves. When Charles the Great intended to
make a channel betwixt the Rhine and the Danube, look what
his workmen did in the day, these spirits flung down in the
night, Ut conatu Rex desisteret, pervicere. Such feats can
they do. But that which Bodine, 1.4, Theat. nat. thinks
(following Tyrius belike, and the Platonists,) they can tell
the secrets of a man's heart, aut cogitationes hominum, is
most false; his reasons are weak, and sufficiently confuted
by Zanch. lib. 4, cap. 9. Hierom. lib. 2, com. in Mat. ad
cap. 15, Athanasius quaest. 27, and Antiochum Principem, and
others.

Orders.] As for those orders of good and bad Devils, which
the Platonists hold, is altogether erroneous, and those
Ethnics boni et mali Genii, are to be exploded: these heathen
writers agree not in this point among themselves, as Dandinus
notes, An sint mali non conveniunt, some will have all
spirits good or bad to us by a mistake, as if an Ox or Horse
could discourse, he would say the Butcher was his enemy
because he killed him, the Grazier his friend because he fed
him; a Hunter preserves and yet kills his game, and is hated
nevertheless of his game; nec piscatorem piscis amare potest,
&c. But Jamblichus, Psellus, Plutarch, and most Platonists
acknowledge bad, et ab eorum malificiis cavendum, and we
should beware of their wickedness, for they are enemies of
mankind, and this Plato learned in Egypt, that they
quarrelled with Jupiter, and were driven by him down to hell.
That which Apuleius, Xenophon, and Plato contend of Socrates'
Daemonium, is most absurd: That which Plotinus of his, that
he had likewise Deum pro Daemonio; and that which Porphiry
concludes of them all in general, if they be neglected in
their sacrifice they are angry; nay more, as Cardan in his
Hyperchen will, they feed on men's souls, Elementa sunt
plantis elementum, animalibus plantae, hominibus animalia,
erunt et homines aliis, non autem diis, nimis enim remota est
eorum natura a nostrs, quapropter daemonibus: and so belike
that we have so many battles fought in all ages, countries,
is to make them a feast, and their sole delight: but to
return to that I said before, if displeased they fret and
chafe (for they feed belike on the souls of beasts, as we do
on their bodies), and send many plagues amongst us; but if
pleased, then they do much good; is as vain as the rest and
confuted by Austin, l. 9. c. 8. de Civ. Dei. Euseb. l.4.
praepar. Evang. c. 6. and others. Yet thus much I find, that
our school-men and other Divines make nine kinds of bad
spirits, as Dionysius hath done of Angels. In the first rank
are those false gods of the Gentiles, which were adored
heretofore in several Idols, and gave Oracles at Delphos, and
elsewhere; whose Prince is Beelzebub. The second rank is of
Liars and Aequivocators, as Apollo Pythius, and the like. The
third are those vessels of anger, inventors of all mischief;
as that Theutus in Plato; Esay calls them vessels of fury;
their Prince is Belial. The fourth are malicious revenging
Devils; and their Prince is Asmodaeus. The fifth kind are
cozeners, such as belong to Magicians and Witches; their
Prince is Satan. The sixth are those aerial devils that
corrupt the air and cause plagues, thunders, fires, &c.;
spoken of in the Apocalypse, and Paul to the Ephesians names
them the Princes of the air; Meresin is their Prince. The
seventh is a destroyer, Captain of the Furies, causing wars,
tumults, combustions, uproars, mentioned in the Apocalypse;
and called Abaddon. The eighth is that accusing or
calumniating Devil, whom the Greeks call ??aß???? [Diabolos],
that drives men to despair. The ninth are those tempters in
several kinds, and their Prince is Mammon. Psellus makes six
kinds, yet none above the Moon: Wierus in his Pseudomonarchia
Daemonis, out of an old book, makes many more divisions and
subordinations, with their several names, numbers, offices,
&c., but Gazaeus cited by Lipsius will have all places full
of Angels, Spirits, and Devils, above and beneath the Moon,
aetherial and aerial, which Austin cites out of Varro l. vii.
de Civ. Dei, c. 6. "The celestial Devils above, and aerial
beneath," or, as some will, gods above, Semidei or half gods
beneath, Lares, Heroes, Genii, which climb higher, if they
lived well, as the Stoics held; but grovel on the ground as
they were baser in their lives, nearer to the earth: and are
Manes, Lemures, Lamiae, &c. They will have no place but all
full of Spirits, Devils, or some other inhabitants; Plenum
Coelum, aer, aqua, terra, et omnia sub terra, saith Gazaeus;
though Anthony Rusca in his book de Inferno, lib. v. cap. 7.
would confine them to the middle Region, yet they will have
them everywhere. "Not so much as a hair-breadth empty in
heaven, earth, or waters, above or under the earth." The air
is not so full of flies in summer, as it is at all times of
invisible devils: this Paracelsus stiffly maintains, and that
they have every one their several Chaos, others will have
infinite worlds, and each world his peculiar Spirits, Gods,
Angels, and Devils to govern and punish it.

"Singula nonnulli credunt quoque sidera posse
Dici orbes, terramque appellant sidus opacum,
Cui minimus divum praesit."--
"Some persons believe each star to be a world, and this earth
an opaque star, on which the least of the gods presides."

Gregorius Tholsanus makes seven kinds of aetherial Spirits or
Angels, according to the number of the seven Planets,
Saturnine, Jovial, Martial, of which Cardan discourseth lib.
xx. de subtil. he calls them substantias primas, Olympicos
daemones Tritemius, qui praesunt Zodiaco, &c., and will have
them to be good Angels above, Devils beneath the Moon, their
several names and offices he there sets down, and which
Dionysius of Angels, will have several spirits for several
countries, men, offices, &c., which live about them, and as
so many assisting powers cause their operations, will have in
a word, innumerable, as many of them as there be Stars in the
Skies. Marcilius Ficinus seems to second this opinion, out of
Plato, or from himself I know not, (still ruling their
inferiors, as they do those under them again, all
subordinate, and the nearest to the earth rule us, whom we
subdivide into good and bad angels, call gods or devils, as
they help or hurt us, and so adore, love or hate) but it is
most likely from Plato, for he relying wholly on Socrates,
quem mori potius quam mentiri voluisse scribit, whom he says
would rather die than tell a falsehood out of Socrates'
authority alone, made nine kinds of them: which opinion
belike Socrates took from Pythagoras, and he from
Trismegistus, he from Zoroastes, first God, second idea, 3.
Intelligences, 4. Arch-Angels, 5. Angels, 6. Devils, 7.
Heroes, 8. Principalities, 9. Princes: of which some were
absolutely good, as gods, some bad, some indifferent inter
deos et homimines, as heroes and demons, which ruled men, and
were called genii, or as Proclus and Jamblichus will, the
middle betwixt God and men. Principalities and Princes, which
commanded and swayed Kings and countries; and had several
places in the Spheres perhaps, for as every sphere is higher,
so hath it more excellent inhabitants: which belike is that
Galilaeus a Galileo and Kepler aims at in his Nuncio Syderio,
when he will have Saturnine and Jovial inhabitants: and which
Tycho Brahe doth in some sort touch or insinuate in one of
his Epistles: but these things Zanchius justly explodes, cap.
3. lib. 4. P. Martyr. in 4. Sam. 28.

So that according to these men the number of aetherial
spirits must needs be infinite: for if that be true that some
of our mathematicians say: if a stone could fall from the
starry heaven, or eighth sphere, and should pass every hour
an hundred miles, it would be 65 years, or more, before it
would come to ground, by reason of the great distance of
heaven from earth, which contains as some say 110 millions
803 miles, besides those other heavens, whether they be
crystalline or watery which Maginus adds, which peradventure
holds as much more, how many such spirits may it contain? And
yet for all this Thomas Albertus, and most hold that there be
far more angels than devils.

Sublunary devils, and their kinds.] But be they more or less,
Quod supra nos nihil ad nos (what is beyond our comprehension
does not concern us). Howsoever as Martianus foolishly
supposeth, Aetherii daemones non curant res humanas, they
care not for us, do not attend our actions, or look for us,
those aetherial spirits have other worlds to reign in belike
or business to follow. We are only now to speak in brief of
these sublunary spirits or devils: for the rest, our divines
determine that the Devil had no power over stars, or heavens;
Carminibus coelo possunt deducere lunam, &c. (by their charms
(verses) they can seduce the moon from the heavens). Those
are poetical fictions, and that they can sistere aquam
fluviis, et vertere sidera retro, &c., (stop rivers and turn 
the stars backwards in their courses) as Canadia in Horace,
'tis all false. They are confined until the day of judgment
to this sublunary world, and can work no farther than the
four elements, and as God permits them. Wherefore of these
sublunary devils, though others divide them otherwise
according to their several places and offices, Psellus makes
six kinds, fiery, aerial, terrestrial, watery, and
subterranean devils, besides those fairies, satyrs, nymphs,
&c.

Fiery spirits or devils are such as commonly work by blazing
stars, fire-drakes, or ignes fatui; which lead men often in
flumina aut praecipitia, saith Bodine, lib. 2. Theat.
naturae, fol. 221. Quos inquit arcere si volunt viatores,
clara voce Deum appelare, aut pronam facie terram contingente
adorare oportet, et hoc amuletum majoribus nostris acceptum
ferre debemus, &c., (whom if travellers wish to keep off they
must pronounce the name of God with a clear voice, or adore
him with their faces in contact with the ground, &c.);
likewise they counterfeit suns and moons, stars oftentimes,
and sit on ship masts: In navigiorum summitatibus visuntur;
and are called dioscuri, as Eusebius 1. contra Philosophos,
c. xlviii. informeth us, out of the authority of Zenophanes;
or little clouds, ad motum nescio quem volantes; which never
appear, saith Cardan, but they signify some mischief or other
to come unto men, though some again will have them to pretend
good, and victory to that side they come towards in sea
fights, St. Elmo's fires they commonly call them, and they do
likely appear after a sea storm; Radzivillius, the Polonian
duke, calls this apparition, Sancti Germani sidus; and saith
moreover that he saw the same after a storm as he was
sailing, 1582, from Alexandria to Rhodes. Our stories are
full of such apparations in all kinds. Some think they keep
their residence in that Hecla, a mountain in Iceland, Aetna
in Sicily, Lipari, Vesuvius, &c. These devils were worshipped
heretofore by that superstitious ????µa?te?a
(Pyromanteia)(fire-worship, or divination by fire) and the
like.

Aerial spirits or devils, are such as keep quarter most part
in the air, cause many tempests, thunder, and lightnings,
tear oaks, fire steeples, houses, strike men and beasts, make
it rain stones, as in Livy's time, wool, frogs, &c.
Counterfeit armies in the air, strange noises, swords, &c.,
as at Vienna before the coming of the Turks, and many times
in Rome, as Scheretzius l. de spect. c. 1. part. 1. Lavater
de spect. part. 1. c. 17. Julius Obsequens, an old Roman; in
his book of prodigies, ab urb. cond. 505. Machiavel hath
illustrated by many examples, and Josephus, in his book de
bello Judaico, before the destruction of Jerusalem. All which
Guil. Postellus, in his first book, c. 7, de orbis concordia,
useth as an effectual argument (as indeed it is) to persuade
them that will not believe there be spirits or devils. They
cause whirlwinds on a sudden, and tempestuous storms; which
though our meteorologists generally refer to natural causes,
yet I am of Bodine's mind, Theat. Nat. 1.2. they are more
often caused by those aerial devils, in their several
quarters; for Tempestatibus se ingerunt, saith Rich.
Argentine; as when a desperate man makes away with himself;
which by hanging or drowning they frequently do, as
Kornmannus observes, de mirac. mort. part. 1, c. 76.
tripudium agentes, dancing and rejoicing at the death of a
sinner. These can corrupt the air, and cause plagues,
sickness, storms, shipwrecks, fires, inundations. At Mons
Draconis in Italy, there is a most memorable example in
Jovianus Pontanus: and nothing so familiar (if we may believe
those relations of Saxo Grammaticus, Olaus Magnus, Damianus
A. Goes) as for witches and sorcerers, in Lapland, Lithuania,
and all over Scandia, to sell winds to mariners, and cause
tempests, which Marcus Paulus the Venetian relates likewise
of the Tartars. These kind of devils are much delighted in
sacrifices (saith Porphiry), held all the world in awe, and
had several names, idols, sacrifices, in Rome, Greece, Egypt,
and at this day tyrannise over, and deceive those Ethnics and
Indians, being adored and worshipped for gods. For the
Gentiles' gods were devils (as Trismegistus confesseth in his
Asclepius), and he himself could make them come to their
images by magic spells: and are now as much "respected by our
papists (saith Pictorius) under the name of saints." These
are they which Cardan thinks desire so much carnal copulation
with witches(Incubi and Succubi), transform bodies, and are
so very cold if they be touched; and that serve magicians.
His father had one of them (as he is not ashamed to relate),
an aerial devil, bound to him for twenty and eight years. As
Agrippa's dog had a devil tied to his collar; some think that
Paracelsus (or else Erastus belies him) had one confined to
his sword pummel; others wear them in rings, &c. Jannes and
Jambres did many things of old by their help; Simon Magus,
Cinops, Apollothus Tianeus, Jamblichus, and Tritemius of
late, that showed Maximilian the emperor his wife, after she
was dead; Et verrucam in collo ejus (saith Godolman) so much
as the wart in her neck. Delrio, lib. ii. hath divers
examples of their feats: Cicogna, lib. iii. cap. 3. and
Wierus in his book de praestig. daemonum. Boissardus de magis
et veneficis.

Water-devils are those Naiads or water nymphs which have been
heretofore conversant about waters and rivers. The water (as
Paracelsus thinks) is their chaos, wherein they live; some
call them fairies, and say that Habundia is their queen;
these cause inundations, many times shipwrecks, and deceive
men divers ways, as Succuba, or otherwise, appearing most
part (saith Tritemius) in women's shapes. Paracelsus hath
several stories of them that have lived and been married to
mortal men, and so continued for certain years with them, and
after, upon some dislike, have forsaken them. Such a one was
Aegeria, with whom Numa was so familiar, Diana, Ceres, &c.
Olaus Magnus hath a long narration of one Hotherus, a king of
Sweden, that having lost his company, as he was hunting one
day, met with these water nymphs or fairies, and was feasted
by them; and Hector Boethius, of Macbeth, and Banquo, two
Scottish lords, that as they were wandering in the woods, had
their fortunes told them by three strange women. To these,
heretofore, they did use to sacrifice, by that ?d??µa?te?a
(hydromanteia) or divination by waters.

Terrestrial devils are those lares, Genii, Fauns, Satyrs,
Wood-nymphs, Foliots, Fairies, Robin Goodfellows, Trulli,
&c., which as they are most conversant with men, so they do
them most harm. Some think it was they alone that kept the
heathen people in awe of old, and had so many idols and
temples erected to them. Of this range was Dagon amongst the
Philistines, Bel amongst the Babylonians, Astartea amongst
the Sidonians, Baal amongst the Samaritans, Isis and Osiris
amongst the Egyptians, &c.; some put our fairies into this
rank, which have been in former times adored with much
superstition, with sweeping their houses, and setting of a
pail of clean water, good victuals, and the like, and then
they should not be pinched, but find money in their shoes,
and be fortunate in their enterprises. These are they that
dance on heaths and greens, as Lavater thinks with Tritemius,
and as Olaus Magnus adds, leave that green circle, which we
commonly find in plain fields, which others hold to proceed
from a meteor falling, or some accidental rankness of the
ground, so nature sports herself; they are sometimes seen by
old women and children. Hierom. Pauli, in his description of
the city of Bercino in Spain, relates how they have been
familiarly seen near that town, about fountains and hills;
Nonnunquam (saith Tritemius) in sua latibula montium
simpliciores homines ducant, stupenda mirantibus ostendentes
miracula, nolarum sonitus, spectacula, &c. (Sometimes they
seduce too simple men into tneir mountain retreats, where
they exhibit wonderful sights to their marvelling eyes, and
astonish their ears by the sound of bells, &c.) Giraldus
Cambrensis gives instance in a monk of Wales that was so
deluded. Paracelsus reckons up many places in Germany, where
they do usually walk in little coats, some two feet long. A
bigger kind there is of them called with us hobgoblins, and
Robin Goodfellows, that would in those superstitious times
grind corn for a mess of milk, cut wood, or do any manner of
drudgery work. They would mend old irons in those Aeolian
isles of Lipari, in former ages, and have been often seen and
heard. Tholosanus calls them Trullos and Getulos, and saith,
that in his days they were common in many places of France.
Dithmarus Bleskenius, in his description of Iceland, reports
for a certainty, that almost in every family they have yet
some such familiar spirits; and Foelix Malleolus, in his book
de crudel. daemon. affirms as much, that these Trolli or
Telchines are very common in Norway, "and seen to do drudgery
work;" to draw water, saith Wierus, lib. i. cap. 22. dress
meat, or any such thing. Another sort of these there are,
which frequent forlorn houses, which the Italians call
foliots, most part innoxious, Cardan holds; "They will make
strange noises in the night, howl sometimes pitifully, and
then laugh again, cause great flame and sudden lights, fling
stones, rattle chains, shave men, open doors and shut them,
fling down platters, stools, chests, sometimes appear in the
likeness of hares, crows, black dogs, &c." of which read Pet.
Thyraeis the Jesuit, in his Tract. de locis infestis, part.
1. et cap. 4, who will have them to be devils or the souls of
damned men that seek revenge, or else souls out of purgatory
that seek ease; for such examples peruses Sigismundus
Scheretzius, lib. de spectris, part 1. c. 1. which he saith
he took out of Luther most part; there be many instances.
Plinius Secundus remembers such a house at Athens, which
Athenodorus the philosopher hired, which no man durst inhabit
for fear of devils. Austin, de Civ. Dei, lib. 22, cap. 1.
relates as much of Hesperius the Tribune's house, at Zubeda,
near their city of Hippos, vexed with evil spirits, to his
great hindrance, Cum afflictione animalium et servorum
suorum. Many such instances are to be read in Niderius
Formicar, lib. 5. cap. xii. 3. &c. Whether I may call these
Zim and Ochim, which Isaiah, cap. xiii. 21. speaks of, I make
a doubt. See more of these in the said Scheretz. lib. 1. de
spect. cap. 4. he is full of examples. These kinds of devils
many times appear to men, and affright them out of their
wits, sometimes walking at noon-day, sometimes at nights,
counterfeiting dead men's ghosts, as that of Caligula, which
(saith Suetonius) was seen to walk in Lavinia's garden, where
his body was buried, spirits hanuted, and the house where he
died, Nulla nox sine terrore transacti, donec incendio
consumpta; every night this happened, there was no quietness,
till the house was burned. About Hecla, in Iceland, ghosts
commonly walk, animas mortuorum simulantes, saith Joh. Anan.
lib. 3. de nat. daem. Olaus, lib. 2. cap. 2. Natal. Tallopid. 
lib. de apparit. spir. Kornmannus de mirac. mort. part. 1.
cap. 44. such sights are frequently seen circa sepulchra et
monasteria, saith Lavat. lib. 1. cap. 19. in monasteries and
about churchyards, loca paludinosa, ampla aedificata,
solitari, et caede hominum notata, &c. (marshes, great
buildings, solitary places, or remarkable as the scene of
some murder). Thyreus adds, ubi gravius peccatum est
commissum, impii pauperum oppressores et nequiter insignes
habitat (where some very heinous crime was committed, there
the impious and infamous generally dwell). These spirits
often foretel men's deaths by several signs, as knockings,
groanings, &c., though Rich. Argentine, c. 18. praestigiis
daemonum, will ascribe these predictions to good angels, out
of the authority of Ficinus and others; prodigia in obitu
principum saepius contingunt, &c. (prodigies frequently occur
at the deaths of illustrious men), as in the Lateran church
in Rome, the popes' deaths are foretold by Sylvester's tomb.
Near Rupes Nova in Finland, in the kingdom of Sweden, there
is a lake, in which, before the governor of the castle dies,
a spectrum, in the habit of Arion with his harp, appears, and
makes excellent music, like those blocks in Cheshire, which
(they say) presage death to the master of the family; or that
oak in Lanthadran park in Cornwall, which foreshows as much.
Many families in Europe are so put in mind of their last by
such predictions, and many men are forewarned (if we may
believeParacelsus) by familiar spirits in divers shapes, as
cocks, crows, owls, which often hover about sick men's
chambers, vel quia morientium foeditatem sentiunt, as
Baracellus conjectures, et ideo super tectum infirmorum
crocitant, because they smell a corse; or for that (as
Bernardinus de Bustis thinketh) God permits the devil to
appear in the form of crows, and such like creatures, to
scare such as live wickedly here on earth. A little before
Tully's death (saith Plutarch) the crows made a mighty noise
about him, tumultuose perstrepentes, they pulled the pillow
from under his head. Rob. Gaguinus hist. Franc. lib. 8,
telleth such another wonderful story at the death of Johannes
de Monteforti, a French lord, anno 1345, tanta corvorum
multitudo aedibus morientis insedit, quantam esse in Gallia
nemo judicasset (a multitude of crows alighted on the house
of the dying man, such as no one imagined existed in France).
Such prodigies are very frequent in authors. See more of
these in the said Lavater, Thyreus de locii infestis, part 3,
cap. 58. Pictorius, Delrio, Cicogna, lib. 3, cap. 9.
Necromancers take upon them to raise and lay them at their
pleasures: and so likewise those which Mizaldus calls
Ambulones, that walk about midnight on great heaths and
desert places, which (saith Lavater) "draw men out of the
way, and lead them all night a bye-way, or quite bar them of
their way;" these have several names in several places; we
commonly call them Pucks. In the deserts of Lop, in Asia,
such illusions of walking spirits are often perceived, as you
may read in M. Paulus, the Venetian his travels; if one lose
his company by chance, these devils will call him by his
name, and counterfeit voices of his companions to seduce him.
Hieronym. Pauli, in his book of the hills of Spain, relates
of a great mount in Cantabria, where such spectrums are to be
seen; Lavater and Cicogna have variety of examples of spirits
and walking devils in this kind. Sometimes they sit by the
highway side, to give men falls, and make their horses
stumble and start as they ride (if you will believe the
relation of that holy man Ketellus in Nubrigensis, that had
an especial grace to see devils, Gratiam divinitus collatam,
and talk with them, Et impavidus cum spiritibus sermonem
miscere, without offence, and if a man curse or spur his
horse for stumbling, they do heartily rejoice at it; with
many such pretty feats.

Subterranean devils are as common as the rest, and do as much
harm. Olaus Magnus, lib. 6, cap. 19, makes six kinds of them;
some bigger, some less. These (saith Munster) are commonly
seen about mines of metals, and are some of them noxious;
some again do no harm. The metal-men in many places account
it good luck, a sign of treasure and rich ore when they see
them. Georgius Agricola in his book de subterraneis
animantibus, cap. 31, reckons two more notable kinds of them,
which he calls Getuli and Cobali, both "are clothed after the
manner of metal-men, and will many times imitate their
works." Their office, as Pictorius and Paracelsus think, is
to keep treasure in the earth, that it be not all at once
revealed; and besides, Cicogna avers that they are the
frequent causes of those horrible earthquakes "which often
swallow up, not only houses, but whole islands and cities;"
in his third book, cap. 11, he gives many instances.

The last are conversant about the centre of the earth to
torture the souls of damned men to the day of judgment; their
egress and regress some suppose to be about Aetna, Lipari,
Mons Hecla in Iceland, Vesuvius, Terra del Fuego, &c.,
because many shrieks and fearful cries are continually heard
thereabouts, and familiar apparitions of dead men, ghosts and
goblins.

Their Offices, Operations, Study.] Thus the devil reigns, and
in a thousand several shapes, "as a roaring lion still seeks
whom he may devour," 1 Pet. v., by earth, sea, land, air, as
yet unconfined, though some will have his proper place the
air; all that space between us and the moon for them that
transgressed least, and hell for the wickedest of them, Hic
velut in carcere ad finem mundi, tunc in locum funestiorem
trudendi, as Austin holds de Civit. Dei, c. 22, lib. 14, cap.
3 et 23; but be where he will, he rageth while he may to
comfort himself, as Lactantius thinks, with other men's
falls, he labours all he can to bring them into the same pit
of perdition with him. "For men's miseries, calamities, and
ruins are the devil's banqueting dishes." By many temptations
and several engines, he seeks to captivate our souls. The
Lord of Lies, saith Austin, "As he was deceived himself, he
seeks to deceive others, the ringleader to all naughtiness,
as he did by Eve and Cain, Sodom and Gomorrah, so would he do
by all the world. Sometimes he tempts by covetousness,
drunkenness, pleasure, pride, &c., errs, dejects, saves,
kills, protects, and rides some men, as they do their horses.
He studies our overthrow, and generally seeks our
destruction;" and although he pretend many times human good,
and vindicate himself for a god by curing of several
diseases, aegris sanitatem, et caecis luminis usum
restituendo, as Austin declares, lib. 10, de Civit. Dei, cap.
6, as Apollo, Aesculapius, Isis, of old have done; divert
plagues, assist them in wars, pretend their happiness, yet
nihil his impurius, scelestius, nihil humano geberi
infestius, nothing so impure, nothing so pernicious, as may
well appear by their tyrannical and bloody sacrifices of men
to Saturn and Moloch, which are still in use among those
barbarous Indians, their several deceits and cozenings to
keep men in obedience, their false oracles, sacrifices, their
superstitious impositions of fasts, penury, &c. Heresies,
superstitions observations of meats, times, &c., by which
they crucify the souls of mortal men, as shall be showed in
our Treatise of Religious Melancholy. Modico adhuc tempore
sinitur malignari, as Bernard expresseth it, by God's
permission he rageth a while, hereafter to be confined to
hell and darkness, "which is prepared for him and his
angels," Mat. xxv.

How far their power doth extend it is hard to determine; what
the ancients held of their effects, force and operations, I
will briefly show you: Plato in Critias, and after him his
followers, gave out that these spirits or devils, "were men's
governors and keepers, our lords and masters, as we are of
our cattle."  "They govern provinces and kingdoms by oracles,
auguries, dreams, rewards" and punishments, prophecies,
inspirations, sacrifices, and religious superstitions, varied
in as many forms as there be diversity of spirits; they send
wars, plagues, peace, sickness, health, dearth, plenty,
Adstantes hic jam nobis, spectantes, et arbitrantes, &c. as
appears by those histories of Thucydides, Livius, Dionysius
Halicarnassus, with many others that are full of their
wonderful stratagems, and were therefore by those Roman and
Greek commonwealths adored and worshipped for gods with
prayers and sacrifices, &c. In a word, Nihil magis quaerunt
quam metum et admirationem hominum (They seek nothing more
earnestly than the fear and admiration of men); and as
another hath it, Dici non potest, quam impotenti ardore in
homines dominium, et Divinos cultis maligni spiritus
affectent (It is scarcely possible to describe the impotent
ardour with which these malignant spirits aspire to the
honour of being divinely worshipped). Tritemius in his book
de septem secundis, assigns names to such angels as are
governors of particular provinces, by what authority I know
not, and gives them several jurisdictions. Asclepiades a
Grecian, Rabbi Achiba the Jew, Abraham Avenezra, and Rabbi
Azariel, Arabians, (as I find them cited by Cicogna) farther
add, that they are not our governors only, sed ex eorum
concordia et discordia, boni et mali affectus promanant, but
as they agree, so do we and our prince; or disagree; stand or
fall. Juno was a bitter enemy to Troy, Apollo a good friend,
Jupiter indifferent, Aequa Venus Teucris, Pallas iniqua fuit;
some are for us still, some against us, Premente Deo, fert
Deus alter opem.  Religion, policy, public and private
quarrels, wars are procured by them, and they are delighted
perhaps to see men fight, as men are with cocks, bulls, and
dogs, bears, &c., plagues, dearths depend on them, our bene
and male esse, and almost all our other peculiar actions, for
(as Anthony Rusca contends lib. 5, cap. 18, every man hath a
good and a bad angel attending on him in particular, all his
life long, which Jamblichus calls daemonem,) preferments,
losses, weddings, deaths, rewards and pnnishments, and as
Proclus will, all offices whatsoever, alii genetricem, alii
opificem potestatem habent, &c., and several names they give
them according to their offices, as Lares Indegites,
Praestites, &c. When the Arcades in that battle at Cheronae,
which was fought against King Philip for the liberty of
Greece, had deceitfully carried themselves, long after, in
the very same place, Diis Graeciae ultoribus (saith mine
author) they were miserably slain by Metellus the Roman: so
likewise, in smaller matters, they will have things fall out,
as these boni and mali genii favour or dislike us: Saturni
non conveniunt Jovialibus, &c. He that is Saturninus shall
never likely be preferred. That base fellows are often
advanced, undeserving Gnathoes, and vicious parasites,
whereas discreet, wise, virtuous and worthy men are neglected
and unrewarded; they refer to those domineering spirits, or
subordinate Genii; as they are inclined, or favour men, so
they thrive, are ruled and overcome; for as Libanius
supposeth in our ordinary conflicts and contentions, Genius
Genio cedit et obtemperat, one genius yields and is overcome
by another. All particular events almost they refer to these
private spirits; and (as Paracelsus adds) they direct, teach,
inspire, and instruct men. Never was any man extraordinary
famous in any art, action, or great commander, that had not
familiarem daemonem to inform him, as Numa, Socrates, and
many such, as Cardan illustrates, cap. 128, Arcanis
prudentiae civilis, Speciali siquidem gratia, si a Deo donari
asserunt magi, a Geniis coelestibus instrui, ab iis doceri.
But these are most erroneous paradoxes, ineptae et fabulosae
nugae, rejected by our divines and Christian churches. 'Tis
true they have, by God's permission, power over us, and we
find by experience, that they can hurt not our fields only,
cattle, goods, but our bodies and minds. At Hammel in Saxony,
An. 1484, 20 Junii, the devil, in likeness of a pied piper,
carried away 130 children that were never after seen. Many
times men are affrighted out of their wits, carried away
quite, as Scheretzius illustrates, lib. i. c. iv., and
severally molested by his means, Plotinus the Platonist, lib.
14, advers. Gnos. laughs them to scorn, that hold the devil
or spirits can cause any such diseases. Many think he can
work upon the body, but not upon the mind. But experience
pronounceth otherwise, that he can work both upon body and
mind. Tertullian is of this opinion, c. 22. "That he can
cause both sickness and health," and that secretly. Taurellus
adds "by clancular poisons he can infect the bodies, and
hinder the operations of the bowels, though we perceive it
not, closely creeping into them," saith Lipsius, and so
crucify our souls: Et nociva melancholia furiosos efficit.
For being a spiritual body, he struggles with our spirits,
saith Rogers, and suggests (according to Cardan, verba sine
voce, species sine visu, envy, lust, anger, &c.) as he sees
men inclined.

The manner how he performs it, Biarmannus in his Oration
against Bodine, sufficiently declares. He begins first with
the phantasy, and moves that so strongly, that no reason is
able to resist. Now the phantasy he moves by mediation of
humours; although many physicians are of opinion, that the
devil can alter the mind, and produce this disease of
himself: Quibusdam medicorum visum, saith Avicenna, quod
Melancholia contingat a daemonio. Of the same mind is Psellus
and Rhasis the Arab. lib. 1. Tract. 9. Cont. "That this
disease proceeds especially from the devil, and from him
alone." Arculanus cap. 6. in 9. Rhasis, Aelianus Montaltus in
his 9. cap. Daniel Sennertus lib. 1. part 2. cap. 11. confirm
as much, that the devil can cause this disease; by reason
many times that the parties affected prophesy, speak strange
language, but non sine interventu humoris, not without the
humour, as he interprets himself; no more doth Avicenna, si
contingat a daemonio, suffiicit nobis ut convertat
complexionem ad choleram nigram, et sit causa ejus propinqua
cholera nigra; the immediate cause is choler adust, which
Pomponatius likewise labours to make good: Galgerandus of
Mantua, a famous Physician, so cured a daemoniacal woman in
his time, that spake all languages, by purging black choler,
and thereupon belike this humour of Melancholy is called
Balneum Diaboli, the Devil's Bath; the devil spying his
opportunity of such humours drives them many times to
despair, fury, rage, &c., mingling himself amongst these
humours. This is that which Tertullian avers, Corporibus
inflingunt acerbos casus, animaeque repentimos, numbra
distorquent, occulte repentes, &c. and which Lemnius goes
about to prove, Immiscent se mali Genii pravis humoribus,
atque atrae bili, &c. And Jason Pratensis, "that the devil,
being a slender incomprehensible spirit, can easily insinuate
and wind himself into human bodies, and cunningly couched in
our bowels vitiate our healths, terrify our souls with
fearful dreams, and shake our mind with furies." And in
another place, "These unclean spirits settled in our bodies,
and now mixed with our melancholy humours, do triumph as it
were, and sport themselves as in another heaven." Thus he
argues, and that they go in and out of our bodies, as bees do
in a hive, and so provoke and tempt us as they perceive our
temperature inclined of itself; and most apt to be deluded.
Agrippa and Lavater are persuaded, that this humour invites
the devil to it, wheresoever it is in extremity, and of all
other, melancholy persons are most subject to diabolical
temptations and illusion; and most apt to entertain them, and
the Devil best able to work upon them. But whether by
obsession, or possession, or otherwise, I will not determine;
'tis a difficult question. Delrio the Jesuit, Tom. 3. lib. 6.
Springer und his colleague, mall. malef. Pet. Thyreus the
Jesuit, lib. de daemoniacis, de locis infestis, de
Terrificationibus nocturnis, Hieronimus Mengus Flagel. daem.
and others of that rank of pontifical writers, it seems, by
their exorcisms and conjurations approve of it, having forged
many stories to that purpose. A nun did eat a lettuce without
grace, or signing it with the sign of the cross, and was
instantly possessed. Durand. lib. 6. Rationall. c. 86. numb.
8. relates that he saw a wench possessed in Bononia with two
devils, by eating an unhallowed pomegranate, as she did
afterwards confess, when she was cured by exorcisms. And
therefore our Papists do sign themselves so often with the 
sign of the cross, ne daemon ingredi ausit, and exorcise all
manner of meats, as being unclean or accursed otherwise, as
Bellarmine defends. Many such stories I find amongst
pontifical writers, to prove their assertions, let them free
their own credits; some few will recite in this kind out of
most approved physicians. Cornelius Gemma lib. 2. de nat.
mirac. c.4. relates of a young maid, called Katherine
Gualter, a cooper's daughter, An. 1571, that had such strange
passions and convulsions, three men could not sometimes hold
her; she purged a live eel, which he saw a foot and a half
long, and touched it himself; but the eel afterwards
vanished; she vomited some twenty-four pounds of fulsome
stuff of all colours, twice a day for fourteen days; and
after that she voided great balls of hair, pieces of wood,
pigeons' dung, parchment, goose dung, coals; and after them
two pounds of pure blood, and then again coals and stones, of
which some had inscriptions bigger than a walnut, some of
them pieces of glass, brass, &c. besides paroxysms of
laughing, weeping and ecstasies, &c. Et hoc (inquit) cum
horrore vide, this I saw with horror. They could do no good
on her by physic but left her to the clergy. Marcellus
Donatus lib. 2 i. 1 de med. mirab. hath such another story of
a country fellow, that had four knives in his belly, Instar
serrae dentatos, indented like a saw, every one a span long,
and a wreath of hair like a globe, with much baggage of like
sort, wonderful to behold: how it should come into his guts,
he concludes, Certe non alio quam daemonis astutia et dolo
(could assuredly only have been through the artifice of the
devil). Langius Epist. med.lib. 1. Epist. 38 hath many
relations to this effect, and so hath Christopherus a Vega:
Wierus, Skenkius, Sribonius, all agree that they are done by
the subtilty and illusion of the devil. If you shall ask a
reason of this, 'tis to exercise our patience; for as
Tertullian holds, Virtus non est virtus, niso comparet habet
aliquem, in quo superando vim suam ostendat, 'tis to try us
and our faith, 'tis for our offences, and for the punishment
of our sins, by God's permission they do it, Carnifices
vindictae justae Dei, as Tolosanus styles them, Executioners
of his will; or rather as David, Ps. 78. ver 49. "He cast
upon them the fierceness of his anger,indignation, wrath, and
vexation, by sending out of evil angels:" so did he afflict
Job, Saul, the Lunatics and daemoniacal persons whom Christ
cured, Mat. iv. 8. Luke iv. 11. Luke xiii. Mark ix. Tobit
viii. 3. &c. This, I say, happeneth for a punishment of sin,
for their want of faith, incredulity, weakness, distrust, &c.



SUBSECT. III.-- Of Witches and Magicians, how they cause
Melancholy.


You have heard what the devil can do of himself, now you
shall hear what he can perform by his instruments, who are
many times worse (if it be possible) than he himself, and to
satisfy their revenge and lust cause more mischief, Multa
enim mala non egisset daemon, nisi provocatus a sagis, as
Erastus thinks; much harm had never been done, had he not
been provoked by witches to it. He had not appeared in
Samuel's shape, if the Witch of Endor had let him alone; or
represented those serpents in Pharo's presence, had not the
magicians urged him unto it; Nec morbus vel hominibus, vel
brutus infligeret (Erastus maintains) si sagae quiescerent;
men and cattle might go free, if the witches would let him
alone. Many deny witches at all, or if there be any they can
do no harm; of this opinion is Wierus, lib. 3. cap. 53. de
praestig. daem. Austin Lerchemer a Dutch writer, Biarmannus,
Ewichius, Euwaldus, our countryman Scot; with him in Horace,

"Somnia, terrores Magicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos Lemures, portentaque Thessala risu
Excipiunt --"
Say, can you laugh indignant at the schemes
Of magic terrors, visionary dreams,
Portentous wonders, witching imps of hell,
The nightly goblin, and enchanting spell?

They laugh at all such stories; but on the contrary are most
lawyers, divines, physicians, philosophers, Austin,
Hemingius, Danaeus, Chytraeus, Zanchius, Aretius, &c. Delrio,
Springer, Niderus lib. 5. Fornicar. Cuiatius, Bartolus,
consil. 6. tom. 1. Bodine daemoniant. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Godelman, Damhoderius, &c. Paracelsus, Erastus, Scribanius,
Camerarius, &c. The parties by whom the devil deals, may be
reduced to these two, such as command him in show at least,
as conjurors, and magicians, whose detestable and horrid
mysteries are contained in their book called Arbatell;
daemones enim advocati praesto sunt, seque exorcismis et
conjurationibus quasi cogi patiuntur, ut miserum magorum
genus, in impietate detineant. Or such as are commanded, as
witches, that deal ex parte implicite, or explicite, as the
tking hath well defined; many subdivisions there are, and
many several species of sorcerers, witches, enchanters,
charmers, &c. They have been tolerated heretofore some of
them; and magic hath been publicly professed in former times,
in Salamanca, Cracow, and other places, though after censured
by several Universities, and now generally contradicted,
though practised by some still, maintained and excused,
Tanquam res secreta quae non nisi viris magnis et peculiari
beneficio de Coelo instructis communicatur (I use Boesartus
his words) and so far approved by some princes, Ut nihil ausi
aggredi in politicis, in sacris, in consiliis, sine eorum
arbitrio; they consult still with them, and dare indeed do
nothing without their advice. Nero and Heliogabalus,
Maxentius, and Julianus Apostata, were never so much addicted
to magic of old, as some of our modern princes and popes
themselves are now-a-days. Erricus King of Sweden had an
enchanted cap, by virtue of which, and some magical murmur or
whispering terms, he could command spirits, trouble the air,
and make the wind stand which way he would, insomuch that
when there was any great wind or storm, the common people
were wont to say, the king now had on his conjuring cap. But
such examples are infinite. That which they can do, is as
much almost as the devil himself, who is still ready to
satisfy their desires, to oblige them the more unto him. They
can cause tempests, storms, which is familiarly practised by
witches in Norway, Iceland, as I have proved. They can make
friends enemies, and enemies friends by philters; Turpes
amores conciliare, enforce love, tell any man where his
friends are, about what employed though in the most remote
places; and if they will, "bring their sweethearts to them by
night, upon a goat's back flying in the air." Sigismund
Scheretzius, part. 1. cap. 9. de spect., reports confidently,
that he conferred with sundry such, that had been so carried
many miles, and that he heard witches themselves confess as
much; hurt and infect men and beasts, vines, corn, cattle,
plants, make women abortive, not to conceive, barren, men and
women unapt and unable, married and unmarried, fifty several
ways, saith Bodine, lib. 2, c. 2, fly in the air, meet when
and where they will, as Cicogna proves, and Lavat. de spec.
part. 2, c. 17, "steal young children out of their cradles,
ministerio daemonum, and put deformed in their rooms, which
we call changelings, saith Scheretzius, part. 1, c. 6, make
men victorious, fortunate, eloquent; and therefore in those
ancient monomachies and combats they were searched of old,
they had no magical charms; they can make stick frees, such
as shall endure a rapier's point, musket shot, and never be
wounded: of which read more in Boissardus, cap. 6, de Magia,
the manner of the adjuration, and by whom 'tis made, where
and how to be used in expeditonibus bellicis, proeliis,
duellis, &c., with many peculiar instances and examples; they
can walk in fiery furnaces, make men feel no pain on the
wrack, aut alias torturas sentire; they can stanch blood,
represent dead men's shapes, alter and turn themselves and
others into several forms, at their pleasures. Agaberta, a
famous witch in Lapland, would do as much publicly to all
spectators, Modo Pusilla, modo anus, modo procera ut quercus,
modo vacca, avis, coluber, &c. Now young, now old, high, low,
like a cow, like a bird, a snake, and what not? she could
represent to others what forms they most desired to see, show
them friends absent, reveal secrets, maxima omnium
admiratione, &c. And yet for all this subtilty of theirs, as
Lypsius well observes, Physiolog. Stoicor. lib. 1, cap. 17,
neither these magicians nor devils themselves can take away
gold or letters out of mine or Crassus' chest, et Clientelis
suis largiri, for they are base, poor, contemptible fellows
most part; as Bodin notes they can do nothing in Judicum
decreta aut poenas, in regum conclia vel arcana, nihil in rem
nummariam aut thesauros, they cannot give money to their
clients, alter judges' decrees, or councils of kings, these
minuti Genii cannot do it, altiores Genii hoc sibi
adservarunt, the higher powers reserve these things to
themselves. Now and then peradventure there may be some more
famous magicians like Simon Magus, Apollonius Tyaneus,
Pasetes, Jamblicus, Odo de Stellis, that for a time can build
castles in the air, represent armies, &c., as they are said
to have done, command wealth and treasure, feed thousands
with all variety of meats upon a sudden, protect themselves
and their followers from all princes' persecutions, by
removing from place to place in an instant, reveal secrets,
future events, tell what is done in far countries, make them
appear that died long since, and do many such miracles, to
the world's terror, admiration and opinion of deity to
themselves, yet the devil forsakes them at last, they come to
wicked ends, and raro aut nunquam such imposters are to be
found. The vulgar sort of them can work no such feats. But to
my purpose, they can, last of all, cure and cause most
diseases to such as they love or hate, and this of melancholy
amongst the rest. Paracelsus, Tom. 4, de morbis amentium.
Tract. 1, in express words affirms; Multi fascinantur in
melancholiam,many are bewitched into melancholy, out of his
experience. The same saith Danaeus lib. 3, de sortiariis.
Vidi, inquit, qui melancholicos morbos gravissimos
induxerunt: I have seen those that have caused melancholy in
the most grievous manner, dried up women's paps, cured gout,
palsy; this and apoplexy, falling sickness, which no physic
could help, solo tactu, by touch alone. Ruland in his 3 Cent.
Cura 91, gives an instance of one David Helde, a young man,
who by eating cakes which a witch gave him, mox delirare
coepit, began to dote on a sudden, and was instantly mad: F.
H. D. in Hildesheim, consulted about a melancholy man,
thought his disease was partly magical, and partly natural,
because he vomited pieces of iron and lead, and spake such
languages as he had never been taught; but such examples are
common in Scribanius, Hercules de Saxonia, and others. The
means by which they work are usually charms, images, as that
in Hector Boethius of King Duffe; characters stamped of
sundry metals, and at such and such constellations, knots,
amulets, words, philters, &c., which generally make the
parties affected, melancholy; as Monavius discourseth at
large in an epistle of his to Acolsius, giving instance in a
Bohemian baron that was so troubled by a philter taken. Not
that there is any power at all in those spells, charms,
characters, and barbarous words; but that the devil doth use
such means to delude them. Ut fideles inde magos (saith
Libanius) in officio retineat, tum in consortium malefactorum
vocet.



SUBSECT. IV.-- Stars a cause. Signs from Physiognomy,
Metoposcopy, Chiromancy.


NATURAL causes are either primary and universal, or secondary
and more particular. Primary causes are the heavens, planets,
stars, &c., by their influence (as our astrologers hold)
producing this and such like effects. I will not here stand
to discuss obiter, whether stars be causes, or signs; or to
apologise for judicial astrology. If either Sextus Empiricus,
Picus Mirandula, Sextus ab Heminga, Pererius, Erastus,
Chambers, &c., have so far prevailed with any man, that he
will attribute no virtue at all to the heavens, or to sun, or
moon, more than he doth to their signs at an innkeeper's
post, or tradesman's shop, or generally condemn all such
astrological aphorisms approved by experience: I refer him to
Bellantius, Pirovanus, Marascallerus, Goclenius, Sir
Christopher Heidon, &c. If thou shalt ask me what I think, I
must answer, nam et doctis hisce erroribus versatus sum (for
I am conversant with these learned errors), they do incline,
but not compel; no necessity at all: agunt non cogunt: and so
gently incline, that a wise man may resist them; sapiens
dominabitur astris: they rule us, but God rules them. All
this (methinks)  Joh. de Indagine hath comprised in brief,
Quaeris a me quantum in nobis operantur astra? &c. "Wilt thou
know how far the stars work upon us? I say they do but
incline, and that so gently, that if we will be ruled by
reason, they have no power over us; but if we follow our own
nature, and be led by sense, they do as much in us as in
brute beasts, and we are no better." So that, I hope, I may
justly conclude with Cajetan, Coelum est vehiculum divinae
virtutis, &c., that the heaven is God's instrument, by
mediation of which he governs and disposeth these elementary
bodies; or a great book, whose letters are the stars (as one
calls it), wherein are written many strange things for such
as can read, "or an excellent harp, made by an eminent
workman, on which, he that can but play, will make most
admirable music." But to the purpose.

Paracelsus is of opinion, "that a physician without the
knowledge of stars can neither understand the cause or cure
of any disease, either of this or gout, not so much as
toothache; except he see the peculiar geniture and scheme of
the party affected." And for this proper malady, he will have
the principal and primary cause of it proceed from the
heaven, ascribing more to stars than humours, "and that the
constellation alone many times produceth melancholy, all
other causes set apart." He gives instance in lunatic
persons, that are deprived of their wits by the moon's
motion; and in another place refers all to the ascendant, and
will have the true and chief cause of it to be sought from
the stars. Neither is it his opinion only, but of many
Galenists and philosophers, though they do not so
peremptorily maintain as much. "This variety of melancholy
symptoms proceeds from the stars," saith Melancthon: the most
generous melancholy, as that of Augustus, comes from the
conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Libra: the bad, as that
of Catiline's, from the meeting of Saturn and the moon in
Scorpio. Jovianus Pontanus, in his tenth book, and thirteenth
chapter de rebus coelestibus, discourseth to this purpose at
large, Ex atrabile varii generantur morbi, &c., "many
diseases proceed from black choler, as it shall be hot or
cold; and though it be cold in its own nature, yet it is apt
to be heated, as water may be made to boil, and burn as bad
as fire; or made cold as ice: and thence proceed such variety
of symptoms, some mad, some solitary, some laugh, some rage,"
&c. The cause of all which intemperance he will have chiefly
and primarily proceed from the heavens, "from the position of
Mars, Saturn, and Mercury." His aphorisms be these, "Mercury
in any geniture, if he shall be found in Virgo, or Pisces his
opposite sign, and that in the horoscope, irradiated by those
quartile aspects of Saturn or Mars, the child shall be mad or
melancholy." Again, "He that shall have Saturn and Mars, the
one culminating, the other in the fourth house, when he shall
be born, shall be melancholy, of which he shall be cured in
time: if Mercury behold them." "If the moon be in conjunction
or opposition at the birth time with the sun, Saturn or Mars,
or in a quartile aspect with them (e malo coeli loco,
Leovitius adds), many diseases are signified, especially the
head and brain is like to be misaffected with pernicious
humours, to be melancholy, lunatic, or mad," Cardan adds,
quarta luna natos, eclipses, earthquakes. Garcteus and
Leovitius will have the chief judgment to be taken from the
lord of the geniture, or where there is an aspect between the
moon and Mercury, and neither behold the horoscope, or Saturn
and Mars shall be lord of the present conjunction or
opposition in Sagittarius or Pisces, of the sun or moon, such
persons are commonly epileptic, dote, daemoniacal,
melancholy: but see more of these aphorisms in the above-
named Pontanus. Garcaeus, cap. 23. de Jud. genitur. Schoner
lib. 1. cap. 8. which he hath gathered out of Ptolemy,
Albubater, and some other Arabians, Junctine, Ranzovius,
Lindhout, Origen, &c. But these men you will reject
peradventure, as astrologers, and therefore partial judges;
then hear the testimony of physicians, Galenists themselves.
Carto confesseth the influence of stars to have a great hand
to this peculiar disease, so doth Jason Pratensis, Lonicerius
praefat. de Apoplexia, Ficinus, Fernelius, &c. P. Cnemander
acknowledgeth the stars an universal cause, the particular
from parents, and the use of the six non-natural things.
Baptista Port. mag. l. 1, c. 10, 12, 15, will have them
causes to every particular individium. Instances and
examples, to evince the truth of these aphorisms, are common
amongst those astrologian treatises. Cardan, in his thirty-
seventh geniture, gives instance in Math. Bologuius. Camerar.
hor. natalit. centur. 7. genit. 6. et 7. of Daniel Gare, and
others; but see Garcaeus, cap. 33. Luc. Gauricus. Tract. 6.
de Azemenis, &c. The time of this melancholy is, when the
significators of any geniture are directed according to art,
as the horned moon, hylech, &c. to the hostile beams or terms
of Saturn and Mars especially, or any fixed star of their
nature, or if  Saturn by his revolution, or transitus, shall
offend any of those radical promissors in the geniture.

Other signs there are taken from physiognomy, metoposcopy,
chiromancy, which because Joh. de Indagine, and Rotman, the
landgrave of Hesse his mathematician, not long since in his
Chiromancy; Baptista Porta, in his celestial Physiognomy,
have proved to hold great amity with astrology to satisfy the
curious, I am the more willing to insert.

The general notions physiognomers give, be these; "black
colour argues natural melancholy; so doth leanness,
hirsuteness, broad veins, much hair on the brows," saith 
Gratanarolus, cap. 7, and a little head, out of Aristotle,
high sanguine, red colour, shows head melancholy; they that
stutter and are bald, will be soonest melancholy (as Avicenna
supposeth), by reason of the dryness of their brains; but he
that will know more of the several signs of humour and wits
out of physiognomy, let him consult with old Adamantus and
Polemus, that comment, or rather paraphrase upon Aristotle's
Physiognomy, Baptista Porta's four pleasant books, Michael
Scot de secretis naturae, John de Indagine, Montaltus, Antony
Zara. anat. ingeniorum, sect. 1, memb. 13, lib. 4.

Chiromancy hath these aphorisms to foretel melancholy.
Tasneir. lib. 5, cap. 2, who hath comprehended the sum of
John de Indagine: Tricassus, Corvinus, and others in his
book, thus hath it; "The Saturnine line going from the
rascetta through the hand, to Saturn's mount, and there
intersected by certain little lines, argues melancholy; so if
the vital and natural make am acute angle, Aphorism 100. The
saturnine, epatic, and natural lines, making a gross triangle
in the hand, argue as much;" which Goclenius, cap. 5. Chiros.
repeats verbatim out of him. In general they conclude all,
that if Saturn's mount be full of many small lines and
intersections, "such men are most part melancholy, miserable,
and full of disquietness, care and trouble, continually vexed
with anxious and bitter thoughts, always sorrowful, fearful,
suspicious; they delight in husbandry, buildings, pools,
marshes, springs, woods, walks, &c." Thaddaeus Haggesius, in
his Metoposcopia, hath certain aphorisms derived from
Saturn's lines in the forehead, by which he collects a
melancholy disposition; and Baptista Porta makes observations
from those other parts of the body, as if a spot be over the
spleen; "or in the nails; if it appear black, it signifieth
much care, grief, contention, and melancholy;" the reason he
refers to the humours, and gives instance in himself, that
for seven years' space he had such black spots in his nails,
and all that while was in perpetual law-suits, controversies
for his inheritance, fear, loss of honour, banishment, grief,
care, and when his miseries ended, the black spots vanished.
Cardan, in his book de libris propriis, tells such a story of
his own person, that a little before his son's death, he had
a black spot, which appeared in one of his nails; and dilated
itself as he came nearer to his end. But I am over tedious in
these toys, which howsoever, in some men's too severe
censures, they may be held absurd and ridiculous, I am the
bolder to insert, as not borrowed from circumforanean rogues
and gipsies, but out of the writings of worthy philosophers
and physicians, yet living some of them, and religious
professors in famous universities, who are able to patronize
that which they have said, and vindicate themselves from all
cavilers and ignorant persons.



SUBSECT. V.-- Old Age a Cause


SECONDARY peculiar causes efficient, so called in respect of
the other precedent, are either congenitae, internae,
innatae, as they term them, inward, innate, inbred; or else
outward and adventitious, which happen to us after we are
born: congenite or born with us, are either natural, as old
age, or praeter naturam (as Fernelius calls it) that
distemperature, which we have from our parents' seed, it
being an hereditary disease. The first of these, which is
natural to all, and which no man living can avoid, is old
age, which being cold and dry, and of the same quality as
melancholy is, must needs cause it, by diminution of spirits
and substance, and increasing of adust humours; therefore
Melancthon avers out of Aristotle, as an undoubted truth,
Senes plerunque delirasse in senecta, that old men familiarly
dote, ob atram bilam, for black choler, which is then
superabundant in them: and Rhasis, that Arabian physician, in
his Cont. lib. 1, cap. 9, calls it "a necessary and
inseparable accident," to all old and decrepit persons. After
seventy years (as the Psalmist saith) "all is trouble and
sorrow;" and common experience confirms the truth of it in
weak and old persons, especially such as have lived in action
all their lives, had great employment, much business, much
command, and many servants to oversee, and leave off ex
abrupto; as Charles the Fifth did to King Philip, resign up
all on a sudden; they are overcome with melancholy in an
instant: or if they do continue in such courses, they dote at
last (senex bis puer), and are not able to manage their
estates through common infirmities incident in their age;
full of ache, sorrow and grief; children again, dizzards,
they carle many times as they sit, and talk to themselves,
they are angry, waspish, displeased with everything,
"suspicious of all, wayward, covetous, hard (saith Tully),
self-willed, superstitious, self-conceited, braggers and
admirers of themselves," as Balthasar Castalio hath truly
noted of them. This natural infirmity is most eminent in old
women, and such as are poor, solitary, live in most base
esteem and beggary, or such as are witches; insomuch that
Wierus, Baptista Porta, Ulricus Molitor, Edwicus, do refer
all that witches are said to do, to imagination alone, and
this humour of melancholy. And whereas it is controverted,
whether they can bewitch cattle to death, ride in the air
upon a coulstaff out of a chimney-top, transform themselves
into cats, dogs, &c., translate bodies from place to place,
meet in companies, and dance, as they do, or have carnal
copulation with the devil, they ascribe all to this redundant
melancholy, which domineers in them, to somniferous potions,
and natural causes, the devil's policy. Non laedunt omnino
(saith Wierus) aut quid mirum faciunt (de Lamiis, lib. 3,
cap. 36), ut putatur, solam vitiatam habent phantasiam; they
do no such wonders at all, only their brains are crazed.
"They think they are witches, and can do hurt, but do not."
But this opinion Bodine, Erastus, Danaeus, Scribanius,
Sebastian Michaelis, Campanella de sensu rerum, lib. 4, cap.
9, Dandinus the Jesuit, lib. 2, de Anima, explode; Cicogna
confutes at large. That witches are melancholy, they deny
not, but not out of corrupt phantasy alone, so to delude
themselves and others, or to produce such effects.



SUBSECT. VI.-- Parents a cause by Propagation.


That other inward inbred cause of Melancholy is our
temperature, in whole or part, which we receive from our
parents, which Fernelius calls Praeter naturam, or unnatural,
it being an hereditary disease; for as he justifies Quale
parentum, maxime patris semen obtigerit, tales evadunt
similares spermaticaeque partes, quocunque etiam morbo Pater
quum generat tenetur, cum semine transfert in Prolem; such as
the temperature of the father is, such is the son's, and look
what disease the father had when he begot him, his son will
have after him; "and is as well inheritor of his infirmities,
as of his lands." And where the complexion and constitution
of the father is corrupt, there (saith Roger Bacon) the
complexion and constitution of the son must needs be corrupt,
and so the corruption is derived from the father to the son.
Now this doth not so much appear in the composition of the
body, according to that of Hippocrates, "in habit,
proportion, scars, and other lineaments; but in manners and
conditions of the mind, Et patrum in natos abeunt cum semine
mores.

Seleucus had an anchor on his thigh, so had his posterity, as
Trogus records, l. 15. Lepidus in Pliny l. 7, c. 17, was
purblind, so was his son. That famous family of Aenobarbi
were known of old, and so surnamed from their red beards; the
Austrian lip, and those Indian flat noses are propagated, the
Bavarian chin, and goggle eyes amongst the Jews, as
Buxtorfius observes; their voice, pace, gesture, looks, are
likewise derived with all the rest of their conditions and
infirmities; such a mother, such a daughter; the very
affections Lemnius contends "to follow their seed, and the
malice and bad conditions of children are many times wholly
to be imputed to their parents;" I need not therefore make
any doubt of Melancholy, but that it is an hereditary
disease. Paracelsus in express words affirms it, lib. de
morb. amentium, to. 4, tr. 1; so doth Crato in an Epistle of
his to Monavius. So doth Bruno Seidelius in his book de morbo
encurab. Montaltus proves, cap. 11, out of Hippocrates and
Plutarch, that such hereditary dispositions are frequent, et
hanc (inquit) fieri reor ob participatam melancholicam
intemperantiam (speaking of a patient) I think he became so
by participation of Melancholy. Daniel Sennertus, lib. 1,
part 2, cap. 9, will have his melancholy constitution derived
not only from the father to the son, but to the whole family
sometimes; Quandoque totis familiis hereditativam, Forestus,
in his medicinal observations, illustrates this point, with
an example of a merchant, his patient, that had this
infirmity by inheritance; so doth Rodericus a Fonseca, tom.
1, consul. 69, by an instance of a young man that was so
affected ex matre melancholica, had a melancholy mother, et
victu melancholico, and bad diet together. Lodovicus
Mercatus, a Spanish physician, in that excellent Tract which
he hath lately written of hereditary diseases, tom. 2, oper.
lib. 5, reckons up leprosy, as those Galbots in Gasccony,
hereditary lepers, pox, stone, gout, epilepsy, &c. Amongst
the rest, this and madness after a set time comes to many,
which he calls a miraculous thing in nature, and sticks for
ever to them as an incurable habit. And that which is more to
be wondered at, it skips in some families the father, and
goes to the son, "or takes every other, and sometimes every
third in a lineal descent, and doth not always produce the
same, but some like, and a symbolizing disease." These
secondary causes hence derived, are saepe mutant decreta
siderum,commonly so powerful, that (as Wolphius holds) they
do often alter the primary causes, and decrees of the
heavens. For these reasons, belike, the Church and
commonwealth, human and Divine laws, have conspired to avoid
hereditary diseases, forbidding such marriages as are any
whit allied; and as Mercatus adviseth all families to take
such, si fieri possit quae maxima distant natura, and to make
choice of those that are most differing in complexion from
them; if they love their own, and respect the common good.
And sure, I think, it hath been ordered by God's especial
providence, that in all ages there should be (as usually
there is) once in 600 years, a transmigration of nations, to
amend and purify their blood, as we alter seed upon our land,
and that there should be as it were an inundation of those
northern Goths and Vandals, and many such like people which
came out of that continent of Scandia and Sarmatia  (as some
suppose) and over-ran, as a deluge, most part of Europe and
Afric, to alter for our good, our complexions, which were
much defaced with hereditary infirmities, which by our lust
and intemperance we had contracted. A sound generation of
strong and able men were sent amongst us, as those northern
men usually are, innocuous, free from riot, and free from
diseases; to qualify and make us as those poor naked Indians
are generally at this day; and those about Brazil (as a late
writer observes), in the Isle of Maragnan, free from all
hereditary diseases, or other contagion, whereas without help
of physic they live commonly 120 years or more, as in the
Orcades and many other places. Such are the common effects of
temperance and intemperance, but I will descend to
particular, and show by what means, and by whom especially,
this infirmity is derived unto us.

Filii ex senibus nati, raro sunt firmi temperamenti, old
men's children are seldom of a good temperament, as Scoltzius
supposeth, consult. 177, and therefore most apt to this
disease; and as Levinus Lemnius farther adds, old men beget
most part wayward, peevish, sad, melancholy sons, and seldom
merry. He that begets a child on a full stomach, will either
have a sick child, or a crazed son (as Cardan thinks),
contradict. med. lib. 1, contradict. 18, or if the parents be
sick, or have any great pain of the head, or megrim, headach,
(Hieronimus Wolthis doth instance in a child of Sebastian
Castalio's); if a drunken man get a child, it will never
likely have a good brain, as Gellius argues, lib. 12, cap. 1.
Ebrii gignunt Ebrios, one drunkard begets another, saith
Plutarch. symp. lib. 1, quest. 5, whose sentence Lemnius
approves, l. 1, c. 4. Alsarius Crutius Gen. de qui sit med.
cent. 3, fol. 182. Macrobius, lib. 1. Avicenna, lib. 3. Fen.
21. Tract 1, cap. 8, and Aristotle himself; sect. 2, prov. 4,
foolish, drunken, or hair-brain women, most part bring forth
children like unto themselves, morosos et languidos, and so
likewise he that lies with a menstruous woman. (Good Master
Schoolmaster do not English this:) Intemperentia veneris,
quam in nautis praesertim insectatur Lemnius, qui uxores
ineunt, nulla menstrui decursus ratione habita, nec observato
interlunio, praecipua causa est, noxia, pernitiosa,
concubitum hunc exitialem ideo, et pestiferum vocat.
Rodoricus a Castro Lusitanus, detestantur ad unum omnes
medici, tum et quarta luna concepti, infoelices plerumque et
amentes, deliri, stolidi, morbosi, impuri, invalidi, tetra
lue sordidi, minima vitales, ommnibus bonis corporis atque
animi destituti: ad laborem nati ,si seniores, inquit
Eustathius, ut Hercules, et alii. Judaei maximi insectantur
foedum hunc, et immundum apud Christianos Concubitum, ut
illicitum abhorrent, et apud suos prohibent; et quod
Christiani toties leprosi, amentes, tot morbili, impetigines,
alphi, psorae, cutis et faciei decolorationes, tam multi
morbi epidemici, acerbi, et venenosi sint, in hunc immundum
concubitum rejiciunt, et crudeles in  pignora vocant, qui
quarta luna profluente hac mensium illuvie concubitum hunc
non perhorrescunt. Damnavit olim divina Lex et morte
mulctavit hujusmodi homines, Lev. 18, 20, et inde nati, siqui
deformes aut mutili, pater dilapidatus, quod non contineret
ab immunda muliere. Gregorius Magnus, petenti Augustino
nunquid apud Britannos hujusmodi concubitum toleraret severe
prohibuit viris suis tum misceri foeminas in consuetis suis
menstruis, &c. I spare to English this which I have said.
Another cause some give, inordinate diet, as if a man eat
garlic, onions, fast overmuch, study too hard, be over-
sorrowful, dull, heavy, dejected in mind, perplexed in his
thoughts, fearful, &c., "their children (saith Cardan subtil.
lib. 18) will be much subject to madness and melancholy; for
if the spirits of the brain be fusled, or misaffected by such
means, at such a time, their children will be fouled in the
brain: they will be dull, heavy, timorous, discontented all
their lives." Some are of opinion, and maintain that paradox
or problem, that wise men beget commonly fools; Suidas gives
instance in Aristarchus the Grammerian, duos reliquit filios
Aristarchum et Aristachorum, ambos stultos; and which Erasmus
urgeth in his Moria, fools beget wise men. Card. subt. l. 12,
gives this cause, Quoniam spiritus sapientum ob studium
resolvuntur, et in cerebrum feruntur a corde: because their
natural spirits are resolved by study, and turned into
animal; drawn from the heart, and those other parts to the
brain. Lemnius subscribes to that of Cardan, and assigns this
reason, Quod persolvant debitum languide, et obscitanter,
unde foetus a parentum generositate desciscit: they pay their
debt (as Paul calls it) to their wives remissly, by which
means their children are weaklings, and many times idiots and
fools.

Some other causes are given, which properly pertain, and do
proceed from the mother: if she be over-dull, heavy, angry,
peevish, discontented, and melancholy, not only at the time
of conception, but even all the while she carries the child
in her womb (saith Fernelius, path. l. 1, 11) her son will be
so likewise affected, and worse, as Lemnius adds, l. 4, c. 7,
if she grieve over much, be disquieted, or by any casualty be
affrighted and terrified by some fearful object heard or
seen, she endangers her child, and spoils the temperature of
it; for the strange imagination of a woman works effectually
upon her infant, that as Baptista Porta proves, Physiog.
coelestis l. 5. c. 2, she leaves a mark upon it, which is
most especially seen in such as prodigiously long for such
and such meats, the child will love those meats, saith
Fernelius, and be addicted to like humours: "if a great-
bellied woman see a hare, her child will often have a hare-
lip," as we call it. Garcaeus de Judiciis geniturarum, cap.
33, hath a memorable example of one Thomas Nickell, born in
the city of Brandeburg, 1551, "that went reeling and
staggering all the days of his life, as if he would fall to
the ground, because his mother being great with child saw a
drunken man reeling in the street." Such another I find in
Martin Wenrichius com. de ortu monstrorum, c. 17. I saw
(saith he) at Wittenberg, in Germany, a citizen that looked
like a carcass; I asked him the cause, he replied, "His
mother, when she bore him in her womb, saw a carcass by
chance, and was so sore affrighted with it, that ex eo foetus
ei assimilatus, from a ghastly impression the child was like
it."

So many several ways are we plagued and punished for our
father's defaults; insomuch that as Fernelius truly saith,
"it is the greatest part of our felicity to be well born, and
it were happy for human kind, if only such parents as are
sound of body and mind should be suffered to marry." An
husbandman will sow none but the best and choicest seed upon
his land, he will not rear a bull or a horse, except he be
right shapen in all parts, or permit him to cover a mare,
except he be well assured of his breed; we make choice of the
best rams for our sheep, rear the neatest kine, and keep the
best dogs, Quanto id diigentius in procreandis liberis
observandum? And how careful then should we be in begetting
of our children? In former times some countries have been so
chary in this behalf, so stern, that if a child were crooked
or deformed in body or mind, they made him away; so did the
Indians of old by the relation of Curtius, and many other
well-governed commonwealths, according to the discipline of
those times. Heretofore in Scotland, saith Hect. Boethius,
"if any were visited with the falling sickness, madness,
gout, leprosy, or any such dangerous disease, which was
likely to be propagated from the father to the son, he was
instantly gelded; a woman kept from all company of men; and
if by chance having some such disease, she were found to be
with child, she with her brood were buried alive:" and this
was done for the common good, lest the whole nation should be
injured or corrupted. A severe doom you will say, and not to
be used amongst Christians, yet more to be looked into than
it is. For now by our too much facility in this kind, in
giving way for all to marry that will, too much liberty and
indulgence in tolerating all sorts, there is a vast confusion
of hereditary diseases, no family secure, no man almost free
from some grievous infirmity or other, when no choice is had,
but still the eldest must marry, as so many stallions of the
race; or if rich, be they fools or dizzards, lame or maimed,
unable, intemperate, dissolute, exhaust through riot, as he
said, jure haereditario sapere jubentur; they must be wise
and able by inheritance: it comes to pass that our generation
is corrupt, we have many weak persons, both in body and mind,
many feral diseases raging amongst us, crazed families,
parentes peremptores; our fathers bad, and we are like to be
worse.



MEMB. II

SUBSECT. I.-- Bad Diet a cause. Substance. Quality of Meats.


ACCORDING to my proposed method, having opened hitherto these
secondary causes, which are inbred with us, I must now
proceed to the outward and adventitious, which happen unto us
after we are born. And those are either evident, remote, or
inward, antecedent, and the nearest: continent causes some
call them. These outward, remote, precedent causes are
subdivided again into necessary and not necessary. Necessary
(because we cannot avoid them, but they will alter us, as
they are used, or abused) are those six non-natural things,
so much spoken of amongst physicians, which are principal
causes of this disease. For almost in every consultation,
whereas they shall come to speak of the causes, the fault is
found, and this most part objected to the patient; Peccavit
circa res sex non naturales: he hath still offended in one of
those six. Montanus, consil. 22, consulted about a melancholy
Jew, gives that sentence, so did Frisemelica in the same
place; and in his 244 counsel., censuring a melancholy
soldier, assigns that reason of his malady, "he offended in
all those six non-natural things, which were the outward
causes, from which came those inward obstructions; and so in
the rest."

These six non-natural things are diet, retention and
evacuation, which are more material than the other because
they make new matter, or else are conversant in keeping or
expelling of it. The other four are air, exercise, sleeping,
waking, and perturbations of the mind, which only alter the
matter. The first of these is diet, which consists in meat
and drink, and causeth melancholy, as it offends in
substance, or accidents, that is quantity, quality, or the
like. And well it may be called a material cause, since that,
as Ferneius holds, "it hath such a power in begetting of
diseases, and yields the matter and sustenance of them; for
neither air, nor perturbations, nor any of those other
evident causes take place, or work this effect, except the
constitution of body, and preparation of humour, do concur.
That a man may say, this diet is the mother of diseases, let
the father be what he will, and from this alone, melancholy
and frequent other maladies arise." Many physicians, I
confess, have written copious volumes of this one subject, of
the nature and qualities of all manner of meats; as namely,
Galen, Isaac the Jew, Halyabbas, Avicenna, Mesue, also four
Arabians, Gordonius, Villanovanus, Wecker, Johannes
Bruerinus, Sitologia de Esculentis et Poculentis, Michael
Savanarola, Tract. 2, c. 8, Anthony Fumanellus, lib. de
regimine senum, Curio in his Comment on Schola Salerna,
Godefridus Stekius arte med., Marsilius cognatus, Ficinus,
Ranzovius, Fonseca, Lessius, Magninus, regim. sanitatis,
Frietagius, Hugo Fridevallius, &c., besides many other in
English, and almost every peculiar physician, discourseth at
large of all peculiar meats in his chapter of melancholy: yet
because these books are not at hand to every man, I will
briefly touch what kind of meats engender this humour,
through their several species, and which are to be avoided.
How they alter and change the matter, spirits first, and
after humours, by which we are preserved, and the
constitution of our body, Fernelius and others will show you.
I hasten to the thing itself: and first of such diet as
offends in substance.

Beef] Beef, a strong and hearty meat (cold in the first
degree, dry in the second, saith Galen l. 3, c. 1., de alim.
fac.) is condemned by him and all succeeding authors, to
breed gross melancholy blood: good for such as are sound, and
of a strong constitution, for labouring men if ordered
aright, corned, young, of an ox (for all gelded meats in
every species are held best), or if old, such as have been
tired out with labour, are preferred. Aubanus and Sabellicus
commend Portugal beef to be the most savoury, best and
easiest of digestion; we commend ours: but all is rejected,
and unfit for such as lead a resty life, any ways inclined to
Melancholy, or dry of complexion: Tales (Galen thinks) de
facile melancholicis aegritudinibus capiuntur.

Pork.] Pork, of all meats, is most nutritive in his own
nature, but altogether unfit for such as live at ease, are
any ways unsound of body or mind: too moist, full of humours,
and therefore noxia delicatis, saith Savanarola, ex earum usu
ut dubitetur an febris quartana generetur: naught for queasy
stomachs, insomuch that frequent use of it may breed a
quartan ague.

Goat.] Savanarola discommends goat's flesh, and so doth
Bruerinus, l. 13, c. 19, calling it a filthy beast, and
rammish: and therefore supposeth it will breed rank and
filthy substance; yet kid, such as are young and tender,
Isaac accepts, Bruerinus and Galen, l. 1, c. 1, de
alimentorum facultatibus.

Hart.] Hart and red deer hath an evil name: it yields gross
nutriment: a strong and great grained meat, next unto a
horse. Which although some countries eat, as Tartars, and
they of China; yet Galen condemns. Young foals are as
commonly eaten in Spain as red deer, and to furnish their
navies, about Malaga especially, often used; but such meats
ask long baking, or seething, to qualify them, and yet all
will not serve.

Venison, Fallow Deer.] All venison is melancholy, and begets
bad blood; a pleasant meat: in great esteem with us (for we
have more parks in England. than there are in all Europe
besides) in our solemn feasts. 'Tis somewhat better hunted
than otherwise, and well prepared by cookery; but generally
bad, and seldom to be used.

Hare.] Hare, a black meat, melancholy, and hard of digestion,
it breeds incubus, often eaten, and causeth fearful dreams,
so doth all venison, and is condemned by a jury of
physicians. Mizaldus and some others say, that hare is a
merry meat, and that it will make one fair, as Martial's
Epigram testifies to Gellia; but this is per accidens, 
because of the good sport it makes, merry company and good
discourse that is commonly at the eating of it, and not
otherwise to be understood.

Conies.] Conies are of the nature of hares. Magninus compares
them to beef, pig, and goat, Reg. sanit. part. 3, c. 11; yet
young rabbits by all men are approved to be good.

Generally, all such meats as are hard of digestion breed
melancholy. Aretus, lib. 7 cap. 5, reckons up heads and feet,
bowels, brains, entrails, marrow, fat, blood, skins, and 
those inward parts, as hearts, lungs, liver, spleen, &c. They
are rejected by Isaac, lib. 2 part. 3, Magninus, part. 3.
cap. 17, Bruerinus, lib. 12, Savanarola, Rub. 32, Tract. 2.

Milk.] Milk, and all that comes of milk, as butter and
cheese, curds, &c., increase melancholy (whey only excepted,
which is most wholesome): some except asses' milk. The rest,
to such as are sound, is nutritive and good, especially for
young children, but because soon turned to corruption, not
good for those that have unclean stomachs, are subject to
headache, or have green wounds, stone, &c. Of all cheeses, I
take that kind which we call Banbury cheese to be the best,
ex vetustis pessimus, the older, stronger, and harder, the
worst, as Langius discourseth in his Epistle to Melancthon,
cited by Mizaldus, Isaac, p. 5, Gal. 3, de cibis boni succi,
&c.

Fowl.] Amongst fowl, "peacocks and pigeons, all feuny fowl
are forbidden, as ducks, geese, swans, herons, cranes, coots,
didappers, waterhens, with all those teals, curs, sheldrakes,
and peckled fowls, that come hither in winter out of Scandia,
Muscovy, Greenland, Friezland, which half the year are
covered all over with snow, and frozen up. Though these be
fair in feathers, pleasant in taste, and have a good outside,
like hypocrites, white in plumes, and soft, their flesh is
hard, black, unwholesome, dangerous, melancholy meat; Gravant
et putrefaciunt stomachum, saith Isaac, part. 5, de vol.,
their young ones are more tolerable, but young pigeons he
quite disapproves.

Fishes.] Rhasis and Magninus discommend all fish, and say,
they breed viscosities, slimy nutriment, little and humourous
nourishment. Savanarola adds, cold, moist: and phlegmatic,
Isaac; and therefore unwholesome for all cold and melancholy
complexions: others make a difference, rejecting only amongst
fresh-water fish, eel, tench, lamprey, crawfish (which Bright
approves, cap. 6), and such as are bred in muddy and standing
waters, and have a taste of mud, as Franciscus Bonsuetus
poetically defines, Lib. de aquatilibus:

"Nam pisces omnes, qui stagna, lacusque frequentant,
Semper plus succi deterioris habent."
"All fish, that standing pools, and lakes frequent,
Do ever yield bad juice and nourishment."

Lampreys, Paulus Jovius, c. 34, de piscibus fluvial. highly
magnifies, and saith, None speak against them, but inepti et
scrupulosi, some scrupulous persons; but eels, c. 33, "he
abhorreth in all places, at all time; all physicians detest
them, especially about the solstice." Gomesius, lib. 1. c.
22, de sale, doth immoderately extol sea-fish, which others
as much vilify, and above the rest, dried, soused, indurate
fish, as ling, fumados, red-herrings, sprats, stock-fish,
haberdine, poor-john, all shell-fish. Tim. Bright excepts
lobster and crab. Mesarius commends salmon, which Bruerinus
contradicts, lib. 22, c. 17. Magninus rejects conger,
sturgeon, turbot, mackerel, skate.

Carp is a fish of which I know not what to determine. 
Franciscus Bonsuetus accounts it a muddy fish. Hippolitus
Salvianus, in his Book de Piscium natura et praeparatione,
which was printed at Rome in folio, 1554, with most elegant
pictures, esteems carp no better than a slimy watery meat.
Paulus Jovius on the other side, disallowing tench, approves
of it; so doth Dupravius in his Books of Fish-ponds.
Frietagius extols it for an excellent wholesome meat, and
puts it amongst the fishes of the best rank; and so do most
of our country gentlemen, that store their ponds almost with
no other fish. But this controversy is easily decided, in my
judgment, by Bruerinus, l. 22, c. 13. The difference riseth
from the site and nature of pools, sometimes muddy, sometimes
sweet; they are in taste as the place is from whence they be
taken. In like manner almost we may conclude of other fresh
fish. But see more in Rondoletius, Bellonius, Oribasius, lib.
7, I. 22, Isaac, l. 1, especially Hippolitus Salvianus, who
is instar omnium solus, &c. Howsoever they may be wholesome
and approved, much use of them is not good; P. Forestus, in
his medicinal observations, relates, that Carthusian friars,
whose living is most part fish, are more subject to
melancholy than any other order, and that he found by
experience, being sometimes their physician ordinary at
Deift, in Holland. He exemplifies it with an instance of one
Buscodnese, a Carthusian of a ruddy colour, and well liking,
that by solitary living, and fish-eating, became so
misaffected.

Herbs.] Amongst herbs to be eaten I find gourds, cucumbers,
coleworts, melons, disallowed, but especially cabbage. It
causeth troublesome dreams, and sends up black vapours to the
brain. Galen, loc. affect. l. 3, c. 6, of all herbs condemns
cabbage; and Isaac, lib. 2, c. 1, Animae gravitatem facit, it
brings heaviness to the soul. Some are of opinion that all
raw herbs and salads breed melancholy blood, except bugloss
and lettuce. Crato, consil. 21 lib. 2, speaks against all
herbs and worts, except borage, bugloss, fennel, parsley,
dill, balm, succory. Magninus, regim. sanitatis, part. 3,
cap. 31. Omnes herbae simpliciter malae, via cibi; all herbs
are simply evil to feed on (as he thinks). So did that
scoffing cook in Plautus hold:

"Non ego coenam condio ut alii coqui solent,
Qui mihi condita prata in patinis proferunt,
Boves qui convivas faciunt, herbasque aggerunt."
"Like other cooks I do not supper dress,
That put whole meadows into a platter,
And make no better of their guests than beeves,
With herbs and grass to feed them fatter."

Our Italians and Spaniards do make a whole dinner of herbs
and salads (which our said Plautus calls coenas terrestres,
Horace, coenas sine sanguine), by which means, as he follows
it,

"Hic homines tam brevem vitam colunt --
Qui herbas hujusmodi in alvum suum congerunt,
Formidolosum dictu, non esu modo
Quas herbas pecudes non edunt, homines edunt."
"Their lives, that eat such herbs, must needs be short,
And 'tis a fearful thing for to report,
That men should feed on such a kind of meat,
Which very juments would refuse to eat:"

They are windy, and not fit therefore to be eaten of all men
raw, though qualified with oil, but in broths, or otherwise.
See more of these in every husbandman and herbalist.

Roots.] Roots, Etsi quorundamn gentiuam opes sint, saith
Bruerinus, the wealth of some countries, and sole food, are
windy and bad, or troublesome to the head: as onions, garlic,
scallions, turnips, carrots, radishes, parsnips: Crato, lib.
2. consil. 11, disallows all roots, though some approve of
parsnips and potatoes. Magninus is of Crato's opinion, "They
trouble the mind, sending gross fumes to the brain, make men
mad, especially garlic, onions, if a man liberally feed on
them a year together." Guianerius, tract. 15, cap. 2,
complains of all manner of roots, and so doth Bruerinus, even
parsnips themselves, which are the best, Lib. 9. cap. 14.

Fruits.] Pastinacarum usus succos gignit improbos. Crato,
consil. 21, lib. 1, utterly forbids all manner of fruits, as
pears, apples, plums, cherries, strawberries, nuts, medlars,
serves, &c. Sanguinem inficiunt, saith Villanovanus, they
infect the blood, and putrefy it, Magninus holds, and must
not therefore be taken via cibi, aut quantitate magni, not to
make a meal of, or in any great quantity. Cardan makes that a
cause of their continual sickness at Fessa in Africa,
"because they live so much on fruits, eating them thrice a
day." Laurentius approves of many fruits, in his Tract of
Melancholy, which others disallow, and amongst the rest
apples, which some likewise commend, sweetings, pairmains,
pippins, as good against melancholy; but to him that is any
way inclined to, or touched with this malady, Nicholas Piso
in his Practics, forbids all fruits, as windy, or to be
sparingly eaten at least, and not raw. Amongst other fruits,
Bruerinus, out of Galen, excepts grapes and figs, but I find
them likewise rejected.

Pulse.] All pulse are naught, beans, peas, vetches, &c., they
fill the brain (saith Isaac) with gross fumes, breed black
thick blood, and cause troublesome dreams. And therefore,
that which Pythagoras said to his scholars of old, may be for
ever applied to melancholy men, A fabis abstinete, eat no
peas, nor beans; yet to such as will needs eat them, I would
give this counsel, to prepare them according to those rules
that Arnoldus Villanovanus, and Frietagius prescribe, for
eating and dressing, fruits, herbs, roots, pulse, &c.

Spices.] Spices cause hot and head melancholy, and are for
that cause forbidden by our physicians to such men as are
inclined to this malady, as pepper, ginger, cinnamon, cloves,
mace, dates, &c., honey and sugar.  Some except honey; to
those that are cold, it may be tolerable, but Dulca se in
bilum vertunt (sweets turn into bile), they are obstructive.
Crato therefore forbids all spice, in a consultation of his,
for a melancholy schoolmaster, Omnia aromatica, et quicquid
sanguinem adurit: so doth Fernelius, consil. 45. Guianerius,
tract. 15, cap. 2. Mercurialis, cons. 189. To these I may add
all sharp and sour things, luscious, and over-sweet, or fat,
as oil, vinegar, verjuice, mustard, salt; as sweet things are
obstructive, so these are corrosive. Gomesius, in his books,
de sale, l. 1, c. 21, highly commends salt; so doth
Codronchus in his tract, de sale Absynthii, Lemn. l. 3, c. 9.
de occult. nat. mir., yet common experience finds salt, and
salt-meats, to be great procurers of this disease. And for
that cause belike those Egyptian priests abstained from salt,
even so much, as in their bread, ut sine pertuibatione anima
esset, saith mine author, that their souls might be free from
perturbations.

Bread.] Bread that is made of baser grain, as peas, beans,
oats, rye, or over-hard baked, crusty, and black, is often
spoken against, as causing melancholy juice and wind. Joh.
Mayor, in the first book of his History of Scotland, contends
much for the wholsomeness of oaten bread: it was objected to
him then living at Paris in France, that his countrymen fed
on oats, and base grain, as a disgrace; but he doth
ingenuously confess, Scotland, Wales, and a third part of
England, did most part use that kind of bread, that it was as
wholesome as any grain, and yielded as good nourishment. And
yet Wecker out of Galen calls it horse-meat, and fitter for
juments than men to feed on. But read Galen himself, lib. 1.
De cibis boni et mali succi, more largely discoursing of corn
and bread.

Wine.] All black wines, over-hot, compound, strong thick
drinks, as Muscadine, Malmsey, Alicant, Rumney, Brownbastard,
Metheglen, and the like, of which they have thirty several
kinds in Muscovy, all such made drinks are hurtful in this
case, to such as are hot, or of a sanguine choleric
complexion, young, or inclined to head-melancholy. For many
times the drinking of wine alone causeth it. Arculanus, c.
16. in 9. Rhasis, puts in wine for a great cause, especially
if it be immoderately used. Guianerius, tract. 15. c. 2.
tells a story of two Dutchmen, to whom he gave entertainment
in his house, "that in one month's space were both melancholy
by drinking of wine, one did nought but sing, the other
sigh." Galen, l. de causis morb. c. 3. Matthiolus on
Dioscorides, and above all other Andreas Bachius, l. 3. 18,
19, 20, have reckoned upon those inconveniences that come by
wine: yet notwithstanding all this, to such as are cold, or
sluggish melancholy, a cup of wine is good physic, and so
doth Mercurialis grant, consil. 25, in that case, if the
temperature be cold, as to most melancholy men it is, wine is
much commended, if it be moderately used.

Cider, Perry.] Cider and perry are both cold and windy
drinks, and for that cause to be neglected, and so are all
those hot spiced strong drinks.

Beer.] Beer, if it be over-new or over-stale, over-strong, or
not sodden, smell of the cask, sharp, or sour, is most
unwholesome, frets, and galls, &c. Henricus Ayrerus, in a
consultation of his, for one that laboured of hypochondriacal
melancholy discommends beer. So doth Crato in that excellent,
counsel of his, Lib. 2. consil. 21. as too windy, because of
the hop. But he means belike that thick black Bohemian beer
used in some other parts of Germany,

" -- nil spissius illa
Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, unde
Constat, quod multas faeces in corpore linquat."
"Nothing comes in so thick,
Nothing goes out so thin.
It must needs follow then
The dregs are left within."

As that old poet scoffed, calling it Stygie mostrum conforme
palludi, a monstrous drink, like the river Styx. But let them
say as they list, to such as are accustomed unto it, "'tis a
most wholesome (so Polydor Virgil calleth it) and a pleasant
drink," it is more subtile and better, for the hop that
rarefies it, hath an especial virtue against melancholy, as
our herbalists confess, Fuchsius approves, Lib. 2. sec. 2.
instit. cap. 11. and many others.

Waters.] Standing waters, thick and ill-coloured; such as
come forth of pools, and moats, where hemp hath been steeped,
or slimy fishes live, are most unwholesome, putrefied, and
full of mites, creepers, slimy, muddy, unclean, corrupt,
impure, by reason of the sun's heat, and still-standing; they
causs foul distemperatures in the body and mind of man, are
unfit to make drink of, to dress meat with, or to be used
about men inwardly or outwardly. They are good for many
domestic uses, to wash horses, water cattle, &c., or in time
of necessity, but not otherwise. Some are of opinion, that
such fat standing waters make the best beer, and that
seething doth defecate it, as Cardan holds, Lib. 13. subtil.
"It mends the substance, and savour of it," but it is a
paradox. Such beer may be stronger, but not so wholesome as
the other, as Jobertus truly justifieth out of Galen,
Paradox, dec. 1. Paradox 5. that the seething of such impure
waters doth not purge or purify them, Pliny, lib. 31. c. 3.
is of the same tenet, and P. Crescentius, agricult. lib. 1.
et lib. 4. c. 11. et c. 45. Pamphilius Herilachus, l. 4. de
nat. aquarum, such waters are naught, not to be used, and by
the testimony of Galen, "breed agues, dropsies, pleurisies,
splenetic and melancholy passions, hurt the eyes, cause a bad
temperature, and ill disposition of the whole body, with bad
colour." This Jobertus stiflly maintains, Paradox, lib. 1.
part. 5. that it causeth blear eyes, bad colour, and many
loathsome diseases to such as use it: this which they say,
stands with good reason; for as geographers relate, the water
of Astracan breeds worms in such as drink it. Axius, or as
now called Verduri, the fairest river in Macedonia, makes all
cattle black that taste of it. Aleacman now Peleca, another
stream in Thessaly, turns cattle most part white, si potui
ducas. L. Aubanus Rohemus refers that struma or poke of the
Bavarians and Styrians to the nature of their waters, as
Munster doth that of the Valesians in the Alps, and Bodine
supposeth the stuttering of some families in Aquitania, about
Labden, to proceed from the same cause, "and that the filth
is derived from the water to their bodies." So that they that
use filthy, standing, ill-coloured, thick, muddy water, must
needs have muddy, ill-coloured, impure, and infirm bodies.
And because the body works upon the mind, they shall have
grosser undrstandings, dull, foggy, melancholy spirits, and
be really subject to all manner of infirmities.

To these noxious simples, we may reduce an infinite number of
compound, artificial, made dishes, of which our cooks afford
us a great variety, as tailors do fashions in our apparel.
Such are puddings stuffed with blood, or otherwise composed;
baked meats, soused indurate meats, fried and broiled
buttered meats; condite, powdered, and over-dried, all cakes,
simnels, buns, cracknels made with butter, spice, &c.,
fritters, pancakes, pies, sausages, and those several sauces,
sharp, or over-sweet, of which scientia popinae, as Seneca
calls it, hath served those Apician tricks, and perfumed
dishes, which Adrian the sixth Pope so much admired in the
accounts of his predecessor Leo decimus; and which prodigious
riot and prodigality have invented in this age. These do
generally engender gross humours, fill the stomach with
crudities, and all those inward parts with obstructions.
Montanus, consil. 22, gives instance; in a melancholy Jew,
that by eating such tart sauces, made dishes, and salt meats,
with which he was overmuch delighted, became melancholy, and
was evil affected. Such examples are familiar and common.



SUBSECT. II.-- Quantity of Diet a Cause.


THERE is not so much harm proceeding from the substance
itself of meat, and quality of it, in ill-dressing and
preparing, as there is from the quantity, disorder of time
and place, unseasonable use of it, inntemperance, overmuch,
or overlittle taking of it. A true saying it is, Plures
crapula quam gladius, This gluttony kills more than the
sword, this omnivorantia et homicida gula, this all devouring
and murdering gut. And that of Pliny is truer, "Simple diet
is the best; heaping up of several meats is pernicious, and
sauces worse; many dishes bring many diseases." Avicen cries
out, "That nothing is worse than to feed on many dishes, or
to protract the time of meats longer than ordinary; from
thence proceed our infirmities, and 'tis the fountain of all
diseases, which arise out of the repugnancy of gross
humours." Thence, saith Fernelius, come crudities, wind,
oppilations, cacochymia, plethora, cachexia, bradiopepsia,
Hinc subite mortes, atque intestata senectus, sudden death,
&c., and what not.

As a lamp is choked with a multitude of oil, or a little fire
with overmuch wood quite extinguished, so is the natural heat
with immoderate eating, strangled in the body. Pernitiosa
sentina est abdomen insaturabile: one saith, An insatiable
paunch is a pernicious sink, and the fountain of all
diseases, both of body and mind. Mercurialis will have it a
peculiar cause of this private disease; Solenander, consil.
5. sect. 3, illustrates this of Mercurialis, with an example
of one so melancholy, ab intempestivis commessationibus,
unseasonable feasting. Crato confirms as much, in that often
cited Counsel, 21, lib. 2. putting superfluous eating for a
main cause. But what need I seek farther for proofs? Hear
Hippocrates himself; Lib. 2, Aphor. 10, "Impure bodies the
more they are nourished, the more they are hurt, for the
nourishment is putrefied with vicious humours."

And yet for all this harm, which apparently follows
surfeiting and drunkenness, see how we luxuriate and rage in
this kind; read what Johannes Stuckius hath written lately of
this subject, in his great volume De Antiquorum Conviviis,
and of our present age; Quam portentosae coenae, prodigious
suppers, Qui dum invitant ad coenam efferunt ad sepulchrum
(they who invite us to supper, only conduct us to our tomb),
what Fagos, Epicures, Apetios, Heliogables, our times afford?
Lucullus' ghost walks still and every man desires to sup in
Apollo; Aesop's costly dish is ordinarily served up. Magis
illa juvant, quae pluris emuntur (The highest-priced dishes
afford the most gratification). The dearest cates are best,
and 'tis an ordinary thing to bestow twenty or thirty pounds
upon a dish, some thousand crowns upon a dinner: Mully-Hamet,
king of Fez and Morocco, spent three pounds on the sauce of a
capon: it is nothing in our times, we scorn all that is
cheap. "We loathe the very light (some of us, as Seneca
notes) because it comes free, and we are offended with the
sun's heat, and those cool blasts, because we buy them not."
This air we breathe is so common, we care not for it; nothing
pleaseth but what is dear. And if we be witty in anything, it
is ad gulam: If we study at all, it is erudite luxu, to
please the palate, and to satisfy the gut. "A cook of old was
a base knave (as Livy complains), but now a great man in
request; cookery is become an art, a noble science: cooks are
gentlemen:" Venter Deus: They wear "their brains in their
bellies, and their guts in their heads," as Agrippa taxed
some parasites of his time, rushing on their own destruction,
as if a man should run upon the point of a sword, usque dum
rumpantur comedunt, "They eat till they burst:" All day, all
night, let the physician say what he will, imminent danger,
and feral diseases are now ready to seize upon them, that
will eat till they vomit, Edunt ut vomant, vomunt ut edant;
saith Seneca; which Dion relates of Vitellius, Solo transitu
ciborum, nutiri judicatus: His meat did pass through and
away, or till they burst again. Strage animantium ventrem
onerant, and rake over all the world, as so many slaves,
belly-gods, and land-serpents, Et totus orbis ventri nimis
angustus, the whole world cannot satisfy their appetite.
"Sea, land, rivers, lakes, &c., may not give content to their
raging guts." To make up the mess, what immoderate drinking
in every place? Senem potum pota trahebat anus, how they
flock to the tavern: as if they were fruges consumere nati,
born to no other end but to eat and drink, like Offellius
Bibulus, that famous Roman parasite, Qui dum vixit, aut bibit
aut mixit; as so many casks to hold wine, yea worse than a
cask, that mars wine, and itself is not marred by it, yet
these are brave men, Silenus Ebrius was no braver. Et quae
fuerunt vitia, mores sunt: 'tis now the fashion of our times,
an honour: Nunc vero res ista eo rediit (as Chrysost. serm.
30, in v. Ephes. comments) Ut effeminatae ridendaeque
ignaviae loco habeatur, nolle inebriari; 'tis now come to
that pass that he is no gentleman, a very milk-sop, a clown
of no bringing up, that will not drink; fit for no company;
he is your only gallant that plays it off finest, no
disparagement now to stagger in the streets, reel, rave, &c.,
but much to his fame and renown; as in like case Epidicus
told Thesprio his fellow-servant, in the Poet. Aedipol
facinus improbum, one urged, the other replied, At jam alii
fecere idem, erit illi illa res honori, 'tis now no fault,
there be so many brave examples to bear one out; 'tis a
credit to have a strong brain, and carry his liquor well; the
sole contention who can drink most, and fox his fellow the
soonest. 'Tis the summum bonum of our tradesmen, their
felicity, life, and soul, Tanta dulcedine effectant, saith
Pliny, lib. 14. cap. 12. ut magna pars non aliud vitae
praemium intelligat, their chief comfort, to be merry
together in an alehouse or tavern, as our modern Muscovites
do in their mede-inns, and Turks in their coffee-houses which
much resemble our taverns; they will labour hard all day,
long to be drunk at night, and spend totius anni labores, as
St. Ambrose adds, in a tippling feast; convert day into
night, as Seneca taxes some in his times, Pervertunt officia
noctis et lucis; when we rise, they commonly go to bed, like
our antipodes,

"Nosque ubi primus equis oriens afflavit anhelis,
Illis sera rubens accendit lumina vesper."

So did Petronius in Tacitus, Heiogabalus in Lampridius.

"-- Noctes vigilabat ad ipsem
Mane, diem totum stertebat.--"
"-- He drank the night away
Till rising dawn, then snored out all the day."


Snymdiris the Sybarite never saw the sun rise or set so much
as once in twenty years. Verres, against whom Tully so much
inveighs, in winter he never was extra tectum vix extra
lectum, never almost out of bed, still wenching and drinking;
so did he spend his time, and so do myriads in our days. They
have gymnasia bibonum, schools and rendezvous; these centaurs
and Lapithae toss pots and bowls as so many balls; invent new
tricks, as sausages, anchovies, tobacco, caviare, pickled
oysters, herrings, fumadoes, &c.: innumerable salt meats to
increase their appetite, and study how to hurt themselves by
taking antidotes "to carry their drink the better; and when
nought else serves, they will go forth, or be conveyed out,
to empty their gorge, that they may return to drink afresh."
They make laws, insanas leges, contra bibendi fallacias, and
brag of it when they have done, crowning that man that is
soonest gone, as their drunken predecessors have done,-- quid
ego video? Ps. Cum corona Pseudolum ebrium tuum --. And when
they are dead, will have a can of wine with Maron's old woman
to be engraven on their tombs. So they triumph in villainy,
and justify their wickedness; with Rabelais, that French
Lucian, drunkenness is better for the body than physic,
because there be more old drunkards than old physicians. Many
such frothy arguments they have, inviting and encouraging 
others to do as they do, and love them dearly for it (no glue
like to that of good fellowship). So did Alcibiades in
Greece; Nero, Bonosus, Heliogabalus in Rome, or Alegabalus
rather, as he was styled of old (as Ignatius proves out of
some old Coins). So do many great men still, as Heresbachius
observes. When a prince drinks till his eyes stare, like
Bitias in the Poet,

-- "(ille impiger hausit
Spumantem vino pateram)."
-- "a thirsty soul;
He took challenge and embraced the bowl:
With pleasure swill'd the gold, nor ceased to draw
Till he the bottom of the brimmer saw."

and comes off clearly, sound trumpets, fife and drums, the
spectators will applaud him, "the bishop himself (if he belie
them not) with his chaplain, will stand by and do as much," O
dignum principe haustum, 'twas done like a prince. "Our
Dutchmen invite all comers with a pail and a dish," Velut
infundibula integras obbas exhauriunt, et in monstrosis
poculis, ipsi monstrosi monstrosius epotant, aking barrels of
their bellies." Incredibile dictu, as one of their own
countrymen complains: Quantum liquoris immodestissima gens
capiat, &c. "How they love a man that will be drunk, crown
him and honour him for it," hate him that will not pledge
him, stab him, kill him; a most intolerable offence, and not
to be forgiven. "He is a mortal enemy that will not drink
with him," as Munster relates of the Saxons. So in Poland, he
is the best servitor, and the honestest fellow, saith
Alexander Gaguinus, "that drinketh most healths to the honour
of his master, he shall be rewarded as a good servant, and
held the bravest fellow that carries his liquor best," when a
brewer's horse will bear much more than any sturdy drinker,
yet for his noble exploits in this kind, he shall be
accounted a most valiant man, for Tam inter epulas fortis vir
esse potest ac in bello, as much valour is to be found in
feasting as in fighting, and some of our city captains, and
carpet knights will make this good, and prove it. Thus they
many times wilfully pervert the good temperature of their
bodies, stifle their wits, strangle nature, and degenerate
into beasts.

Some again are in the other extreme, and draw this mischief
on their heads by too ceremonious and strict diet, being
over-precise, cockney-like,and curious in their observation
of meats, times, as that Medicina statica prescribes, just so
many ounces at dinner, which Lessius enjoins, so much at
supper, not a little more, nor a little less, of such meat,
and at such hours, a diet-drink in the morning, cock-broth,
China-broth, at dinner, plum-broth, a chicken, a rabbit, rib
of a rack of mutton, wing of a capon, the merry-thought of a
hen, &c.; to sounder bodies this is too nice and most absurd.
Others offend in over-much fasting: pining adays, saith
Guianerius, and waking anights, as many Moors and Turks in
these our times do. "Anchorites, monks, and the rest of that
superstitious rank (as the same Guianerius witnesseth, that
he hath often seen to have happened in his time) through
immoderate fasting, have been frequently mad." Of such men
belike Hippocrates speaks, 1 Aphor. 5, when as he saith,
"They more offend in too sparing diet, and are worse
damnified than they that feed liberally, and are ready to
surfeit.



SUBSECT. III.-- Custom of Diet, Delight, Appetite, Necessity,
how they cause or hinder.


NO rule is so general, which admits not some exception; to
this, therefore, which hath been hitherto said (for I shall
otherwise put most men out of commons), and those
inconveniences which proceed from the substance of meats, an
intemperate or unseasonable use of them, custom somewhat
detracts and qualifies, according to that of Hippocrates 2,
Aphorism. 50, "Such things as we have been long accustomed
to, though they be evil in their own nature yet they are less
offensive." Otherwise it might well be objected that it were
a mere tyranny to live after those strict rules of physic;
for custom doth alter nature itself, and to such as are used
to them it makes bad meats wholesome, and unseasonable times
to cause no disorder. Cider and perry are windy drinks, so
are all fruits windy in themselves, cold most part, yet in
some shires of England, Normandy in France, Guipuscoa in
Spain, 'tis their common drink, and they are no whit offended
with it. In Spain, Italy, and Africa, they live most on
roots, raw herbs, camel's milk, and it agrees well with them:
which to a stranger will cause much grievance. In Wales,
lacticiniis vescuntur, as Humphrey Llwyd confesseth, a
Cambro-Briton himself, in his elegant epistle to Abraham
Ortelius, they live most on white meats: in Holland on fish,
roots, butter, and so at this day in Greece, as Bellonius
observes, they had much rather feed on fish than flesh. With
us, Maxima pars victus in carne consistit, we feed on flesh
most part, saith Polydor Virgil, as all northern countries
do; and it would be very offensive to us to live after their
diet, or they to live after ours. We drink beer, they wine;
they use oil, we butter; we in the north are great eaters;
they most sparing in those hotter countries; and yet they and
we following our own customs are well pleased. An Ethiopian
of old seeing an European eat bread, wondered, quomodo
stercoribus vescentes viverimus, how we could eat such kind
of meats: so much differed his countrymen from ours in diet,
that as mine author infers, si quis illorum victum apud nos
aemulari vellet; if any man should so feed with us, it would
be all one to nourish, as Cicuta, Aconitum, or Hellebore
itself. At this day in China, the common people live in a
manner altogether on roots and herbs, and to the wealthiest,
horse, ass, mule, dogs, cat-flesh, is as delightsome as the
rest, so Mat. Riccius the jesuit relates, who lived many
years amongst them. The Tartars eat raw meat, and most
commonly horse-flesh, drink milk and blood, as the Nomades of
old. Et lac concretum cum sanquine potat equino. They scoff
at our Europeans for eating bread, which they call tops of
weeds, and horse meat, not fit for men; and yet Scaliger
accounts them a sound and witty nation, living a hundred
years; even in the civilest country of them they do thus, as
Benedict the jesuit observed in his travels, from the great
Mogul's Court by land to Pekin, which Riccius contends to be
the same with Cambula in Cataia. In Scandia their bread is
usually dried fish, and so likewise in the Shetland isles;
and their other fare, as in Iceland, saith Dithmarus
Bleskenius, butter, cheese, and fish; their drink water,
their lodging on the ground. In America in many places their
bread is roots, their meat palmitos, pinas, potatoes, &c.,
and such fruits. There be of them too that familiarly drink
salt sea-water all their lives, eat raw meat, grass, and that
with delight. With some, fish, serpents, spiders; and in
divers places they eat man's flesh, raw and roasted, even the
Emperor Montezuma himself. In some coasts, again, one tree
yields them cocoa-nuts, meat and drink, fire, fuel, apparel;
with his leaves, oil, vinegar, cover for houses, &c., and yet
these men going naked, feeding coarse, live commonly a
hundred years, are seldom or never sick; all which diet our
physicians forbid. In Westphalia they feed most part on fat
meats and wourts, knuckle deep, and call it cerebrum Iovis:
in the low countries with roots, in Italy frogs and snails
are used. The Turks, saith Busbequius, delight most in fried
meats. In Muscovy, garlic and onions are ordinary meat and
sauce, which would be pernicious to such as are unaccustomed
to them, delightsome to others; and all is because they have
been brought up unto it. Husbandmen, and such as labour, can
eat fat bacon, salt gross meat, hard cheese, &c. (O dura
messorum ilia), coarse bread at all times, go to bed and
labour upon a full stomach, which to some idle persons would
be present death, and is against the rules of physic, so that
custom is all in all. Our travellers find this by common
experience when they come in far countries and use their
diet, they are suddenly offended, as our Hollanders and
Englishmen when they touch upon the coasts of Africa, those
Indian capes and islands are commonly molested with
calentures, fluxes, and much distempered by reason of their
fruits. Peregrina, etsi suavia, solent vescentibus
perturbationes insignes adferre, strange meats, though
pleasant, cause notable alterations and distempers. On the
other side, use or custom mitigates or makes all good again.
Mithridates by often use, which Pliny wonders at, was able to
drink poison, and a maid, as Curtius records, sent to
Alexander from K. Porus, was brought up with poison from her
infancy. The Turks, saith Bellonius, lib. 3, c. 15, eat opium
familiarly, a drachm at once, which we dare not take in
grains. Garcius ab Horto writes of one whom he saw at Goa in
the East Indies, that took ten drachms of opium in three
days; and yet consulto loquebatur, spake understandingly, so
much can custom do. Theophrastus speaks of a shepherd that
could eat hellebore in substance. And therefore Carcian
concludes out of Galen, Consuetudinem utcunque ferendam, nisi
valde malam. Custom is howsoever to be kept, except it be
extremely bad: he adviseth all men to keep their old customs,
and that by the authority of Hippocrates himself, Dandum
aliquid tempori, aetati, regioni, consuetudini, and therefore
continue as they began, be it diet, bath, exercise, &c., or
whatsoever else.

Another exception is delight, or appetite, to such and such
meats; though they be hard of digestion, melancholy; yet as
Fuchsius excepts cap. 6. lib. 2. Institut. sect. 2. "The
stomach doth really digest, and willingly entertain such
meats we love most, and are pleasing to us, abhors on the
other side such as we distaste." Which Hippocrates confirms,
Aphorism. 2, 38. Some cannot endure cheese out of a secret
antipathy, or to see a roasted duck, which to others is a
delightsome meat.

The last exception is necessity, poverty, want, hunger, which
drives men many times to do that which otherwise they are
loth, cannot endure, and thankfully to accept of it: as
beverage in ships, and in sieges of great cities, to feed on
dogs, cats, rats, and men themselves. Three outlaws in Hector
Boethius, being driven to their shifts, did eat raw flesh,
and flesh of such fowl as they could catch, in one of the
Hebrides for some few months. These things do mitigate or
disannul that which hath been said of melancholy meats, and
make it more tolerable; but to such as are wealthy, live
plenteously, at ease, may take their choice, and refrain if
they will, these viands are to be forborne, if they be
inclined to, or suspect; melancholy, as they tender their
healths: Otherwise if they be intemperate, or disordered in
their diet, at their peril be it. Qui monet amat, Ave et
cave.

He who advises is your friend,
Farewell and to your health attend.



SUBSECT. IV.-- Retention and Evacuation a cause, and how.

OF retention and evacuation, there be divers kinds, which are
either concomitant, assisting, or sole causes many times of
melancholy. Galen reduceth defect and abundance to this head;
others "All that is separated, or remains."

Costiveness.] In the first rank of these, I may well reckon
up costiveness, and keeping in of our ordinary excrements,
which as it often causeth other diseases, so this of
melancholy in particular. Celsus, lib. 1. cap. 3. saith, "It
produceth inflammation of the head, dulness, cloudiness,
headache, &c." Prosper Calenus, lib. de atra bile, will have
it distemper not the organ only, "but the mind itself by
troubling of it:" and sometimes it is a sole cause of
madness, as you may read in the first book of Skenkius's
Medicinal Observations. A young merchant going to Nordeling
fair in Germany, for ten days' space never went to stool; at
his return he was grievously melancholy, thinking that he was
robbed, and would not be persuaded but that all his money was
gone; his friends thought he had some philtrum given him, but
Onelius, a physician, being sent for, found his costiveness
alone to be the cause, and thereupon gave him a clyster, by
which he was speedily recovered. Trincavelius, consult. 35
lib. 1. saith as much of a melancholy lawyer, to whom he
administered physic, and Rodericus a Fonseca, consult. 85.
tom. 2. of a patient of his, that for eight days was found,
and therefore melancholy affected. Other retentions and
evacuations there are, not simply necessary, but at some
times; as Fernelius accounts them. Path. lib. 1. cap. 15. as
suppression of haemorrhoids, or monthly issues in women,
bleeding at nose, immoderate or no use at all of Venus: or
any other ordinary issues.

Detention of haemorrhoids, or monthly issues, Villanovanus
Breviar. lib. 1. cap. 18. Arculanus, cap. 16. in 9. Rhasis,
Vittorius Faventinus, pract. mag. Tract. 2. cap. 15. Bruel, 
&c. put for ordinary causes. Fuchsius, l. 2. sect. 5. c. 30.
goes farther, and saith, "That many men unseasonably cured of
the hemorrhoids have been corrupted with melancholy, seeking
to avoid Scylla, they fall into Charybdis. Galen, l. de hum.
commen. 3. ad text. 26. illustrates this by an example of
Lucius Martius, whom he cured of madness, contracted by this
means: And Skenkius hath two other instances of two
melancholy and mad women, so caused from the suppression of
their months. The same may be said of bleeding at the nose,
if it be suddenly stopped, and have been formerly used, as
Villanovanus urgeth: And Fuchsius, lib. 2. sect. 5. cap. 33.
stiffly maintains, "That without great danger, such an issue
may not be stayed."

Venery omitted produceth like effects. Mathiolus, epist. 5.
1. penult. "avoucheth of his knowledge, that some through
bashfulness abstained from venery, and thereupon became very
heavy and dull; and some others that were very timorous,
melancholy, and beyond all measure sad." Oribasius, med.
collect. l. 6. c. 37. speaks of some, "That if they do not
use carnal copulation, are continually troubled with
heaviness and headache; and some in the same case by
intermission of it." Not use of it hurts many, Arculanus, c.
6. in 9. Rhasis, et Magninus, part. 3. cap. 5. think, because
it "sends up poisonous vapours to the brain and heart." And
so doth Galen himself hold, "That if this natural seed be
over-long kept (in some parties) it turns to poison."
Hieronymus Mercurialis, in his chapter of Melancholy, cites
it for an especial cause of this malady, Priapismus,
Satyriasis, &c., Haliabbas, 5. Theor. c. 36. reckons up this
and many other diseases. Villanovanus Breviar. l. 1. c. 18.
saith, "He knew monks and widows grievously troubled with
melancholy, and that for this sole cause." Lodovicus
Mercatus, l. 2. de mulierum affect. cap. 4. and Rodericus a
Castro, de morbis mulier. l. 2. c. 3 treat largely of this
subject, and will have it produce a peculiar kind of
melancholy in stale maids, nuns, and widows, Ob suppressionem
mensium et venerem omissam, timidae, moestaee, anxiae,
verecundae, supiciosae, languentes, consilii inopes, cum
summa vitae et rerum meliorum desperatione, &c., they are
melancholy in the highest degree, and all for want of
husbands. Aelianus Montaltus, cap. 37. de melanchol. confirms
as much out of Galen; so doth Wierus, Christoferus a Vega de
art. med lib. 3. c. 14, relates many such examples of men and
women, that he had seen so melancholy. Foelix Plater in the
first book of his Observations, "tells a story of an ancient
gentleman in Alsatia, that married a young wife, and was not
able to pay his debts in that kind for a long time together, 
by reason of his several infirmities: but she, because of
this inhibition of Venus, fell into a horrible fury, and
desired every one that came to see her, by words, looks, and
gestures, to have to do with her," &c. Bernardus Patarnus, a
physician, saith, "He knew a good honest godly priest, that
because he would neither willingly marry, nor make use of the
stews, fell into grievous melancholy fits." Hildesheim,
spicel. 2. hath such another example of an Italian melancholy
priest, in a consultation had Anno 1580. Jason Pratensis
gives instance in a married man, that from his wife's death
abstaining, "after marriage, became exceedingly melancholy,"
Rodericus a Fonseca in a young man so misaffected, Tom. 2.
consult. 85. To these you may add, if you please, that
conceited tale of a Jew, so visited in like sort, and so
cured, out of Poggius Florentinus.

Intemperate Venus is all but as bad in the other extreme.
Galen. 1. 6. de morbis popular. sect. 5. text. 26, reckons up
melancholy amongst those diseases which are "exasperated by
venery:" so doth Avicenna, 2, 3. c. 11. Oribisius, loc.
citat. Ficinus, lib. 2. de sanitate tuenda. Marsiius
Cognatus, Montaltus, cap. 27. Guianerius, Tract. 3. cap. 2.
Maguinus, cap. 5, part. 3. gives the reason, because "it
infrigidates and dries up the body, consumes the spirits, and
would therefore have all such as are cold and dry to take
heed of and to avoid it as a mortal enemy." Jacchinus in 9.
Rhasis, cap. 15, ascribes the same cause, and instanceth in a
patient of his, that married a young wife in a hot summer,
"and so dried himself with chamber-work, that he became in
short space from melancholy, mad:" he cured him by moistening
remedies. The like example I find in Laelius a Fonte
Eugubinus, consult. 129. of a gentleman of Venice, that upon
the same occasion was first melancholy, afterwards mad. Read
in him the story at large.

Any other evacuation stopped will cause it, as well as these
above named, be it bile, ulcer, issue, &c. Hercules de
Saxonia, lib. 1. c. 16. and Gordornius, verify this out of
their experience. They saw one wounded in the head, who as
long as the sore was open, Lucida habuit mentis intervallia,
was well; but when it was stopped, Rediit melancholia, his
melancholy fit seized on him again.

Artificial evacuations are much like in effect, as hot
houses, baths, bloodletting, purging, unseasonably and
immoderately used. Baths dry too much, if used in excess, be
they natural or artificial, and offend extreme hot or cold;
bone dries, the other refrigerates over much. Montanus,
consil. 137, saith, they over-heat the liver. Joh. Struthius,
Stigmat. artis. l. 4. c. 9. contends, "that if one stays
longer than ordinary at the bath, go in too oft, or at
unseasonable times, he putrefies the humours in his body." To
this purpose writes Magnini, l. 3. c. 5. Guianerius, Tract.
15. c. 21, utterly disallows all hot baths in the melancholy
adust. "I saw (saith he) a man that laboured of the gout,who
to be freed of his malady came to the bath, and was instantly
cured of his disease, but got another worse, and that was
madness." But this judgment varies as the humour doth, in hot
or cold: baths may be good for one melancholy man, bad for
another; that which will cure it in this party, may cause it
in a second.

Phlebotomy.] Phlebotomy, many times neglected, may do much
harm to the body, when there is a manifest redundance of bad
humour; and melancholy blood; and when these humours heat and
boil, if this be not used in time, the parties affected, so
inflamed, are in great danger to be mad; but if it be
unadvisedly, importunely, immoderately used, it doth as much
harm by refrigerating the body, dulling the spirits, and
consuming them: as Job. Curio in his 10th Chapter well
reprehends, such kind of letting blood doth more hurt than
good: "The humours rage much more than they did before, and
is so far from avoiding melancholy, that it increaseth it,
and weakeneth the sight." Prosper Calenus observes as much of
all phlebotomy, except they keep a very good diet after it;
yea, and as Leonartus Jacchinus speaks out of his own
experience, "The blood is much blacker to many men after
their letting of blood than, it was at first." For this cause
belike Salust. Salvinianus, l. 2. c. 1. will admit or hear of
no blood-letting at all in this disease, except it be
manifest it proceed from blood: he was (it appears) by his
own words in that place, master of an hospital of mad men,
"and found by long experience, that this kind of evacuation,
either in head, arm, or any other part, did more harm than
good." To this opinion of his, Felix Plater is quite
opposite, "though some wink at, disallow and quite contradict
all phlebotomy in melancholy, yet by long experience I have
found innumerable so saved, after they had been twenty, nay,
sixty times let blood, and to live happily after it. It was
an ordinary thing of old, in Galen's time, to take at once
from such men six pounds of blood, which now we dare scarce
take in ounces; sed viderint medici;" great books are written
of this subject.

Purging upward and downward, in abundance of bad humours
omitted, may be for the worst; so likewise as in the
precedent, if overmuch, too frequent or violent, it weakeneth
their strength, saith Fuchsius, l. 2. sect. 2. c. 17. or if
they be strong or able to endure physic, yet it brings them
to an ill habit, they make their bodies no better than
apothecaries' shops, this and such like infirmities must
needs follow.



SUBSECT. V.-- Bad Air, a Cause of Melancholy.


AIR is a cause of great moment, in producing this, or any
other disease, being that it is still taken into our bodies
by respiration, and our more inner parts. "If it be impure
and foggy, it dejects the spirits, and causeth diseases by
infection of the heart," as Paulus hath it, lib. 1. c. 49.
Avicenna lib. 1. Gal. de. san. tuenda. Mercurialis,
Montaltus, &c. Fernelius saith, "A thick air thickeneth the
blood and humours." Lemnius reckons up two main things most
profitable, and most pernicious to our bodies; air and diet:
and this peculiar disease, nothing sooner causeth (Jobertus
holds) "than the air wherein we breathe and live." Such as is
the air, such be our spirits; and as our spirits, such are
our humours. It offends commonly if it be too hot and dry.
thick, fuliginous, cloudy, blustering, or a tempestuous air.,
Bodine in his fifth Book, De repub. cap. 1,5. of his Method
of History, proves that hot countries are most troubled with
melancholy, and that there are therefore in Spain, Africa,
and Asia Minor, great numbers of mad men, insomuch that they
are compelled in all cities of note, to build hospitals for
them. Leo Afer, lib. 3. de Fessa urbe, Ortelius and Zuniger,
confirm as much: they are ordinarily so choleric in their
speeches, that scarce two words pass without railing or
chiding in common talk, and often quarrelling in the streets.
Gordonius will have every man take notice of it: "Note this
(saith he) that in hot countries it is far more familiar than
in cold." Although this we have now said be not continually
so, for as Acosta truly saith, under the Equator itself, is a
most temperate habitation, wholesome air, a paradise of
pleasure: the leaves ever green, cooling showers. But it
holds in such as are intemperately hot, as Johannes a Meggen
found in Cyprus, others in Malta, Apulia, and the Holy Land,
where at some seasons of the year is nothing but dust, their
rivers dried up, the air scorching hot, and earth inflamed;
insomuch that many pilgrims going barefoot for devotion sake,
from Joppa to Jerusalem upon the hot sands, often run mad, or
else quite overwhelmed with sand, profundis arenis, as in
many parts of Africa, Arabia Deserta, Bactriana, now
Charassan, when the west wind blows Involuti arenis
transeunta necantur (They perish in clouds of sand). Hercules
de Saxonia, a professor in Venice, gives this cause why so
nany Venetiaa women are melancholy, Quod diu sub sole degant,
they tarry too long in the sun. Montanus, consil. 21. amongst
other causes assigns this; Why that Jew his patient was mad,
Quod tam multum exposuit se calori et frigori: he exposed
himself so much to heat and cold, and for that reason in
Venice, there is little stirring in those brick paved streets
in summer about noon, they are most part then asleep: as they
are likewise in the great Mogol's countries, and all over the
East Indies. At Aden in Arabia, as Lodovicus Vertomannus
relates in. his travels, they keep their markets in the
night, to avoid extremity of heat; and in Ormus, like cattle
in a pasture, people of all sorts lie up to the chin in water
all day long. At Braga in Portugal; Burgos in Castile;
Messina in Sicily, all over Spain and Italy, their streets
are most part narrow, to avoid the sunbeams. The Turks wear
great turbans ad fugandos solis radios, to refract the
sunbeams; and much inconvenience that hot air of Bantam in
Java yields to our men, that sojourn there for traffic; where
it is so hot, "that they that are sick of the pox, lie
commonly bleaching in the sun to dry up their sores." Such a
complaint I read of those isles of Cape Verde, fourteen
degrees from the Equator, they do male audire: One calls them
the unhealthiest clime of the world, for fluxes, fevers,
frenzies, calentures, which commonly seize on seafaring men
that touch at them, and all by reason of a hot distemperature
of the air. The hardiest men are offended with this heat, and
stiffest clowns cannot resist it, as Constantine affirms,
Agricult. l. 2. c. 45. They that are naturally born in such
air, may not endure it, as Niger records of some part of
Mesopotamia, now called Diarbecha: Quibusdam in locis
saevienti aestui adeo subjecta est, ut pleraque animalia
fervore solis et coeli extinguantur, 'tis so hot there in
some places, that men of the country and cattle are killed
with it; and Adricomius of Arabia Felix, by reason of myrrh,
frankincense, and hot spices there growing, the air is so
obnoxious to their brains, that the very inhabitants at some
times cannot avoid it, much less weaklings and strangers.
Arnatus Lusitanus, cent. 1. curat. 45, reports of a young
maid, that was one Vincent a currier's daughter, some
thirteen years of age, that would wash her hair in the heat
of the day (in July) and so let it dry in the sun, "to make
it yellow, but by that means tarrying too long in the heat,
she inflamed her head, and made herself mad."

Cold air in the other extreme is almost as bad as hot, and so
doth Montaltus esteem of it, c. 11. if it be dry withal. In
those northern countries, the people are therefore generally
dull, heavy, and many witches, which (as I have before
quoted) Saxo Grammaticus, Olaus, Baptista Porta ascribe to
melancholy. But these cold climes are more subject to natural
melancholy (not this artificial) which is cold and dry: for
which cause Mercurius Britannicus belike puts melancholy men
to inhabit just under the Pole. The worst of the three is a
thick, cloudy, misty, foggy air, or such as come from fens,
moorish grounds, lakes, muckhills, draughts, sinks, where any
carcasses or carrion lies, or from whence any stinking
fulsome smell comes: Galen, Avicenna, Mercurialis, new and
old physicians, hold that such air is unwholesome, and
engenders melancholy, plagues, and what not? Alexandretta an
haven-town in the Mediterranean Sea, Saint John do Ulloa, an
haven in Nova-Hispania, are much condemned for a bad air, so
are Durazzo in Albania, Lithuania, Ditmarsh, Pomptinae
Paludes in Italy, the territories about Pisa, Ferrara, &c.,
Romney Marsh with us; the Hundreds in Essex, the fens in
Lincolnshire. Cardan, de rerum varietate, l. 17. c. 96. finds
fault with the sight of those rich, and most populous cities
in the Law Countries, as Bruges, Ghent, Amsterdam, Leyden,
Utrecht, &c., the air is bad; and so at Stockholm in Sweden;
Rezium in Italy, Salisbury with us, Hull and Lynn: they may
be commodious for navigation, this new kind of fortification,
and many other good necessary uses; but are they so
wholesome? Old Rome hath descended from the hills to the
valley, 'tis the site of most of our new cities, and held
best to build in plains, to take the opportunity of rivers.
Leander Albertus pleads hard for the air and site of Venice,
though the black Moorish lands appear at every low water: the
sea, fire, and smoke (as he thinks) qualify the air; and some
suppose, that a thick foggy air helps the memory, as in them
of Pisa in Italy; and our Cambden, out of Plato, commends the
site of Cambridge, because it is so near the fens. But let
the site of such places be as it may, how can they be excused
that have a delicious seat, a pleasant air, and all that
nature can afford, and yet through their own nastiness, and
sluttishness, immund and sordid manner of life, suffer their
air to putrefy, and themselves to be choked up? Many cities
in Turkey do male audire in this kind: Constantinople itself
where commonly carrion lies in the street. Some find the same
fault in Spain, even in Madrid, the king's seat, a most
excellent air, a pleasant site; but the inhabitants are
sloven; and the streets uncleanly kept.

A troublesome tempestuous air is as bad as impure, rough and
foul weather, impetuous winds, cloudy dark days, as it is
commonly with us, Coelum visu foedum, Polydore calls it a
filthy sky, et in quo facilae generantur nubes; as Tully's
brother Quintus wrote to him in Rome, being then Quaestor in
Britain. "In a thick and cloudy air (saith Lemaius) men are
tetric, sad, and peevish: And if the western winds blow, and
that there be a calm, or a fair sunshine day, there is a kind
of alacrity in men's minds; it cheers up men and beasts: but
if it be a turbulent, rough, cloudy, stormy weather, men are
sad, lumpish, and much dejected, angry, waspish, dulll, and
melancholy." This was Virgil's experiment of old,

"Verum ubi tempestas, et coeli mobilis humor
Mutavere vices, et Jupiter humidus Astro,
Vertuntur species animorum, et pectore motus
Concipiunt alios"--
"But when the face of heaven changed is
To tempests, rain, from season fair:
Our minds are altered, and in our breasts
Fortwith some new conceits appear."

And who is not weather-wise against such and such
conjunctions of planets, moved in foul weather, dull and
heavy in such tempestuous seasons? Gelidum contristat
Aquarius annum: the time requires, and the autumn breeds it;
winter is like unto it, ugly, foul, squalid, the air works on
all men, more or less, but especially on such as are
melancholy, or inclined to it, as Lemnius holds, "They are
most moved with it, and those which are already mad, rave
downright, either in, or against a tempest. Besides, the
devil many times takes his opportunity of such storms, and
when the humours by the air be stirred, he goes in with them,
exagitates our spirits, and vexeth our souls; as the sea
waves, so are the spirits and humours in our bodies tossed
with tempestuous winds and storms." To such as are melancholy
therefore, Montanus, consil. 24, will have tempestuous and
rough air to be avoided, and consil. 27, all night air, and
would not have them to walk abroad, but in a pleasant day.
Lemnius, l. 3. c. 3. discommends the south and eastern winds,
commends the north. Montanus, consil. 31, "wills not any
windows to be opened in the night." Consil. 229. et consil.
230, he discommends especially the south wind, and nocturnal
air: So doth Plutarch. The night and darkness makes men sad,
the like do all subterranean vaults, dark houses in caves and
rocks, desert places cause melancholy in an instant,
especially such as have not been used to it, or otherwise
accustomed. Read more of air in Hippocrates Aetius, l. 3. a
c. 171. ad 175. Oribasius, a c. 1. ad 21. Avicen. l. 1. can.
Fen. 2, doc. 2, Fen. 1. c. 123. to the 12, &c.



SUBSECT. VI.-- Immoderate Exercise a Cause, and how.
Solitariness, Idleness.


NOTHING so good but it may be abused: nothing better than
exercise (if opportunely used) for the preservation of the
body: nothing so bad if it be unseasonable, violent, or
overmuch. Fernelius out of Galen, Path. lib. 1. c. 16..
saith, "That much exercise and weariness consumes the spirits
and substance, refrigerates the body: and such humours which
Nature would have otherwise concocted and expelled, it stirs
up and makes them rage: which being so enraged, diversely
affect and trouble the body and mind." So doth it, if it be
unseasonably used, upon a full stomach, or when the body is
full of crudities, which Fuchsius so much inveighs against,
lib. 2. instit. sect. 2. c. 4. giving that for a cause why
school-boys in Germany are so often scabbed, because they use
exercise presently after meats. Bayerus puts in a caveat
against such exercise, because "it corrupts the meat in the
stomach, and carries the same juice raw, and as yet
undigested, into the veins (saith Lemnius), which there
putrefies and confounds the animal spirits." Crato, consil.
21. l. 2. protests against all such exercise after meat, as
being the greatest enemy to concoction that may be, and cause
of corruption of humours, which produce this and many other
diseases. Not without good reason then doth Salust.
Salvianus, l. 2. c. 1. and Leonartus Jacchinus, in 9, Rhasis.
Mercurialis, Arcubanus, and many others set down immoderate
exercise as a most forcible cause of melancholy.

Opposite to exercise is idleness (the badge of gentry) or
want of exercise, the bane of body and mind, the nurse of
naughtiness, stepmother of discipline, the chief author of
all mischief, one of the seven deadly sins, and a sole cause
of this and many other maladies, the devil's cushion, as
Gualter calls it, his pillow and chief reposal. "For the mind
can never rest, but still meditates on one thing or other,
except it be occupied about some honest business, of his own
accord it rusheth into melancholy. As too much and violent
exercise offends on the one side, so doth an idle life on the
other (saith Crato), it fills the body full of phlegm, gross
humours, and all manner of obstructions, rheums, catarrhs,"
&c. Rhasis, cont. lib. 1. tract. 9, accounts of it as the
greatest cause of melancholy. "I have often seen (saith he)
that idleness begets this humour more than anything else."
Montaltus, c. 1, seconds him out of his experience, "They
that are idle are far more subject to melancholy than such as
are conversant or employed about any office or business."
Plutarch reckons up idleness for a sole cause of the sickness
of the soul: "There are they (saith he) troubled in mind,
that have no other cause but this." Homer, Iliad. 1, brings
in Achilles eating of his own heart in his idleness, because
he might not fight. Mercurialis, consil. 86, for a melancholy
young man urgeth it is a chief cause; why was he melancholy?
because idle. Nothing begets it sooner, increaseth and
continueth it oftener than idleness. A disease familiar to
all idle persons, an inseparable companion to such as live at
ease, Pingui otio desidose agentes, a life out of action, and
have no calling or ordinary employment to busy themselves
about, that have small occasions; and though they have such
is their laziness, dulness, they will not compose themselves
to do aught; they cannot abide work, though it be necessary;
easy as to dress themselves, write a letter or the like; yet
as he that is benumbed with cold sits still shaking, that
might relieve himself with a little exercise or stirring do
they complain, but will not use the facile and ready means to
do themselves good; and so are still tormented with
melancholy. Especially if they have been formerly brought up
to business, or to keep much company, and upon a sudden come
to lead a sedentary life; it crucifies their souls, and
seizeth on them in an instant; for whilst they are any ways
employed, in action, discourse, about any business, sport or
recreation, or in company to their liking; they are very
well: but it alone or idle, tormented instantly again; one
day's solitariness, one hour's sometimes, doth them more
harm, than a week's physic, labour, and company can do good.
Melancholy seizeth on them forthwith being alone, and is such
a torture, that as wise Seneca well saith, Malo mihi male
quam molliter esse, I had rather be sick than idle. This
idleness is either of body or mind. That of body is nothing
but a kind of benumbing laziness, intermitting exercise,
which if we may believe Fernelius; "causeth crudities,
obstructions, excremental humours, quencheth the natural
heat, dulls the spirits, and makes them unapt to do any thing
whatsoever."

"Neglectis urenda filix innascitur agris"
--"for, a neglected field
Shall for the fire its thorns and thistles yield."

As fern grows in untilled grounds, and all manner of weeds,
so do gross humours in an idle body, Ignavum corrumpunt otia
corpus. A horse in a stable that never travels, a hawk in a
mew that seldom flies, are both subject to diseases; which
left unto themselves, are most free from any such
incumbrances. An idle dog will be mangy, and how shall an
idle person think to escape? Idleness of the mind is much
worse than this of the body; wit without employment is a
disease, Aerugo animi, rubigo ingenii: the rust of the soul,
a plague, a hell itself; Maximum animi nocumentum, Galen
calls it. "As in a standing pool, worms and filthy creepers
increase (et vitium capiunt ni moveantur aquae, the water
itself putrefles, and air likewise, if it be not continually
stirred by the wind), so do evil and corrupt thoughts in an
idle person," the soul is contaminated. In a commonwealth,
where is no public enemy, there is likely civil wars, and
they rage upon themselves: this body of ours, when it is
idle, and knows not how to bestow itself, macerates and
vexeth itself with cares, griefs. These fears, discontents,
and suspicions; it tortures and preys upon his own bowels,
and is never at rest. Thus much I dare boldly say, "He or she
that is idle, be they of what condition they will, never so
rich, so well allied, fortunate, happy, let them have all
things in abundance and felicity that heart can wish and
desire, all contentment, so long as he or she or they are
idle, they shall never be pleased, never well in body and
mind, but weary still, sickly still, vexed still, loathing
still, weeping, sighing, grieving, suspecting, offended with
the world, with every object, wishing themselves gone or
dead, or else carried away with some foolish phantasy or
other. And this is the true cause that so many great men,
ladies, and gentlewomen, labour of this disease in country
and city; for idleness is an appendix to nobility; they count
it a disgrace to work, and spend all their days in sports,
recreations, and pastimes, and will therefore take no pains;
be of no vocation; they feed liberally; fare well, want
exercise, action, employment (for to work, I say, they may
not abide), and company to their desires, and thence their
bodies become full of gross humours, wind, crudities; their
minds disquieted, dull, heavy, &c. care, jealousy, fear of
some diseases, sullen fits, weeping fits seize too familiarly
on them. For what will not fear and phantasy work in an idle
body? what distempers will they not cause? when the children
of Israel murmured against Pharaoh in Egypt, he commanded his
officers to double their task, and let them get straw
themselves, and yet make their full number of bricks; for the
sole cause why they mutiny, and are evil at ease, is, "they
are idle." When you shall hear and see so many discontented
persons in all places where you come, so many several
grievances, unnecessary complaints, fear, suspicions, the
best means to redress it is to set them awork, so to busy
their minds: for the truth is, they are idle. Well they may
build castles in the air for a time, and soothe up themselves
with phantastical and pleasant humours, but in the end they
will prove as bitter as gall, they shall be still I say
discontent, suspicious, fearful, jealous, sad, fretting and
vexing of themselves; so long as they be idle, it is
impossible to please them, Otio qui nescit uti, plus habet
negotii quam qui negotium in negotio, as that Agellius could
observe: He that knows not how to spend his time, hath more
business, care, grief, anguish of mind, than he that is most
busy in the midst of all his business, Otiosus animus nescit
quid volet: An idle person (as he follows it) knows not when
he is well, what he would have, or whither he would go, Quum
illuc ventum est illic lubet, he is tired out with
everything, displeased with all, weary of his life: Nec bene
domi, nec militiae neither at home nor abroad, errat, et
praeter vitam vivitur, he wanders and lives besides himself.
In a word, What the mischievous effects of laziness and
idleness are, I do not find any where more accurately
expressed, than in these verses of Philolaches in the Comical
Poet, which for their elegancy I will in part insert.

"Novarum aedium esse arbitror similem ego homninem,
Quando hic natus est: Et rei argumenta dicam.
Aedes quando sunt ad amussim expolitae,
Quisque laudat fabrum, atque exemplum, expetit, &c.
At ubi illi migrat nequam homo indiligensque, &c.
Tempestas venit, contingit tegulas, imbricesque,
Putrefacit aer operam fabri, &c.
Dicam ut homines similes esse aedium arbitremini,
Fabri parentas fundamentum substruunt liberorum,
Expoliunt, docent literas, nec parcunt sumptui,
Ego autem sub fabrorum potestate frugi fui,
Postquam autem migravi in ingenium meum,
Perdidi operam fabrorum illico, oppido,
Venit ignavia, et mihi tempestas fuit,
Adventuque suo grandinem et imbrem attulit,
Illa mihi virtutem deturbavit, &c."

("A young man is like a fair new house, the carpenter leaves
it well built, in good repair of solid stuff; but a bad
tenant lets it rain in, and for want of reparation, fall to
decay, &c. Our parents, tutors, friends, spare no cost to
bring us up in our youth, in all manner of virtuous
education; but when we are left to ourselves, idleness as a
tempest drives all virtuous motions out of our minds, et
nihili sumus, on a sudden, by sloth and such bad ways, we
come to nought.")

Cousin german to idleness, and a concomitant cause, which
goes hand in hand with it, is nimia solitudo, too much
solitariness, by the testimony of all physicians, cause and
symptom both, but as it is here put for a cause it is either
coact, enforced, or else voluntarily. Enforced solitariness
is commonly seen in students, monks, friars, anchorites, that
by their order and course of life must abandon all company,
society of other men, and betake themselves to a private
cell: Otio superstitioso seclusi, as Bale and Hospinian well
term it, such as are the Carthusians of our time, that eat no
flesh (by their order), keep perpetual silence, never go
abroad. Such as live in prison, or some desert place, and
cannot have company, as many of our country gentlemen do in
solitary houses, they must either be alone without
companions, or live beyond their means, and entertain all
comers as so many hosts, or else converse with their servants
and hinds, such as are unequal, inferior to them, and of a
contrary disposition: or else as some do, to avoid
solitariness, spend their time with lewd fellows in taverns,
and in alehouses, and thence addict themselves to some
unlawful disports, or dissolute courses. Divers again are
cast upon this rock of solitariness for want of means, or out
of a strong apprehension of some infirmity, disgrace, or
through bashfulness, rudeness, simplicity, they cannot apply
themselves to others' company. Nullum solum infelici gratius
solitudine, ubi nullus sit qui miseriam exprobret; this
enforced solitariness takes place, and produceth his effect
soonest in such as have spent their time jovially,
peradventure in all honest recreations, in good company, in
some great family or populous city, and are upon a sudden
confined to a desert country cottage far off, restrained of
their liberty, and barred from their ordinary associates;
solitariness is very irksome to such, most tedious, and a
sudden cause of great inconvenience.

Voluntary solitariness is that which is familiar with
melancholy, and gently brings on like a syren, a shoeing-
horn, or some sphinx to this irrevocable gulf, a primary
cause, Piso calls it; most pleasant it is at first, to such
as are melancholy given, to lie in bed whole days, and keep
their chambers, to walk alone in some solitary grove, betwixt
wood and water, by a brook side, to meditate upon some
delightsome and pleasant subject, which shall affect them
most; amabilis insania, et mentus gratissimus error: a most
incomparable delight it is so to melancholize, and build
castles in the air, to go smiling to themselves, acting an
infinite variety of parts, which they suppose and strongly
imagine they represent, or that they see acted or done:
Blandae quidem ab initio, saith Lemnius, to conceive and
meditate of such pleasant things, sometimes, "present, past,
or to come," as Rhasis speaks. So delightsome these toys are
at first, they could spend whole days and nights without
sleep, even whole years alone in such contemplations, and
fantastical meditations, which are like unto dreams, and they
will hardly be drawn from them, or willingly interrupt, so
pleasant their vain conceits are, that they hinder their
ordinary tasks and necessary business, they cannot address
themselves to them, or almost to any study or employment,
these fantastical and bewitching thoughts so covertly, so
feelingly; so urgently, so continually set upon, creep in,
insinuate, possess, overcome, distract, and detain them, they
cannot, I say, go about their more necessary business, stave
off or extricate themselves, but are ever musing,
melancholizing, and carried along, as he (they say) that is
led round about a heath with a Puck in the night, they run
earnestly on in this labyrinth of anxious and solicitous
melancholy meditations, and cannot well or willingly refrain,
or easily leave off; winding and unwinding themselves, as so
many clocks, and still pleasing their humours, until at last
the scene is turned upon a sudden, by some bad object, and
they being now habituated to such vain meditations and
solitary places, can endure no company, can ruminate of
nothing but harsh and distasteful subjects. Fear, sorrow,
suspicion, subrusticus pudor, discontent, cares, and
weariness of life surprise them in a moment, and they can
think of nothing else, continually suspecting no sooner are
their eyes open, but this infernal plague of melancholy
seizeth on them, and terrifies their so representing some
dismal object to their minds, which now by no means, no
labour, no persuasions they can avoid, haeret lateri lethalis
arundo (the arrow of death still remains in the side), they
may not be rid of it, they cannot resist. I may not deny but
that there is some profitable meditation, contemplation, and
kind of solitariness to be embraced, which the fathers so
highly commended, Hierom, Chrysostom, Cyprian, Austin, in
whole tracts, which Petrarch, Erasmus, Stella, and others, so
much magnify in their books; a paradise, a heaven on earth,
if it be used aright, good for the body, and better for the
soul: as many of those old monks used it, to divine
contemplations, as Simulus a courtier in Adrian's time,
Dioclesian the emperor, retired themselves, &c., in that
sense, Vatia solus scit vivere, Vatia lives alone, which the
Romans were wont to say, when they commended a country life.
Or to the bettering of their knowledge, as Democritus,
Cleanthus, and those excellent philosophers have ever done,
to sequester themselves from the tumultuous world, or as in
Pliny's villa Laurentana, Tully's Tusculan, Jovius' study,
that they might better vacare studiis et Deo, serve God, and
follow their studies. Methinks, therefore, our too zealous
innovators were not so well advised in that general
subversion of abbeys and religious houses, promiscuously to
fling down all; they might have taken away those gross abuses
crept in amongst them, rectified such inconveniences, and not
so far to have raved and raged against these fair buildings,
and everlasting monuments of our forefathers' devotion,
consecrated to pious uses; some monasteries and collegiate
cells might have been well spared, and their revenues
otherwise employed, here and there one, in good towns or
cities at least, for men and women of all sorts and
conditions to live in, to sequester themselves from the cares
and tumults of the world, that were not desirous, or fit to
marry; or otherwise willing to be troubled with common
affairs,and know not well where to bestow themselves, to live
apart in, for more conveniency, good education, better
company sake, to follow their studies (I say), to the
perfection of arts and sciences, common good, and as some
truly devoted monks of old had done, freely and truly to
serve God. For these men are neither solitary, nor idle, as
the poet made answer to the husbandman in Aesop, that
objected idleness to him; he was never so idle as in his
company; or that Scipio Africanus in Tully, Nunquam minus
solus, qum cum solus; nunquam minus otiosus, quam quum esset
otiosus; never less solitary, than when he was alone, never
more busy, than when he seemed to be most idle. It is
reported by Plato in his dialogue de Amore, in that
prodigious commendation of Socrates, how a deep meditation
coming into Socrates' mind by chance, he stood still musing,
eodem vestigio cogitabundus, from morning to noon, and when
as then he had not yet finished his meditation, perstabat
cogitans, he so continued till the evening, the soldiers (for
he then followed the camp) observed him with admiration, and
on set purpose watched all night, but he persevered
immoveable ad exortum solis, till the sun rose in the
morning, and then saluting the sun, went his ways. In what
humour constant Socrates did thus, I know not, or how he
might be affected, but this would be pernicious to another
man; what intricate business might so really possess him, I
cannot easily guess but this is otiosum otium, it is far
otherwise with these men, according to Seneca, Omnia nobis
mala solitudo persuadet; this solitude undoeth us, pugnat cum
vita sociali; 'tis a destructive solitariness. These men are
devils alone, as the saying is, Homo solus aut Deus, aut
Daemon: a man alone, is either a saint or a devil, mens ejus
aut languescit, aut tumesci;t and Vae soli in this sense, woe
be to him that is so alone. These wretches do frequently
degenerate from men, and of sociable creatures become beasts,
monsters, inhumane, ugly to behold, Misanthropi; they do even
loathe themselves, and hate the company of men, as so many
Timons, Nebuchadnezzars, by too much indulging to these
pleasing humours, and through their own default. So that
which Mercurialis, consil. 11. sometimes expostulated with
his melancholy patient, may be justly applied to every
solitary and idle person in particular. Natura de te videtur
conqueri posse, &c. "Nature may justly complain of thee, that
whereas she gave thee a good wholesome temperature, a sound
body, and God hath given thee so divine and excellent a soul,
so many good parts, and profitable gifts, thou hast not only
contemned and rejected, but hast corrupted them, polluted
them, overthrown their temperature, and perverted those gifts
with riot, idleness, solitariness, and many other ways, thou
art a traitor to God and nature, an enemy to thyself and to
the world." Perditio tua ex te; thou hast lost thyself
wilfully, cast away thyself; "thou thyself art the efficient
cause of thine own misery, by not resisting such vain
cogitations, but giving way unto them."



SUBSECT. VII.-- Sleeping and Waking, Causes.


WHAT I have formerly said of exercise, I may now repeat of
sleep. Nothing better than moderate sleep, nothing worse than
it, if it be in extremes, or unseasonably used. It is a
received opinion, that a melancholy man cannot sleep
overmuch; Somnus supra modum prodest, as an only antidote,
and nothing offends them more, or causeth this malady sooner,
than waking, yet in some cases sleep may do more harm than
good, in that phlegmatic, swinish, cold, and sluggish
melancholy which Melancthon speaks of, that thinks of waters,
sighing most part, &c. It dulls the spirits, if overmuch, and
senses; fills the head full of gross humours; causeth
distillations, rheums, great store of excrements in the
brain, and all the other parts, as Fuchsius speaks of them,
that sleep like so many dormice. Or if it be used in the day-
time, upon a full stomach, the body ill-composed to rest, or
after hard meats, it increaseth fearful dreams, incubus,
night walking, crying out, and much unquietness; such sleep
prepares the body, as one observes, "to many perilous
diseases." But, as I have said, waking overmuch, is both a
symptom, and an ordinary cause. "It causeth dryness of the
brain, frenzy, dotage, and makes the body dry, lean, hard,
and ugly to behold," as Lemnius hath it. "The temperature of
the brain is corrupted by it, the humours adust, the eyes
made to sink into the head, choler increased, and the whole
body inflamed:" and, as may be added out of Galen 3. de
sanitate tuenda, Avicenna 3. 1. "It overthrows the natural
heat, it causeth crudities, hurts concoction," and what not?
Not without good cause therefore Crato consil. 21, lib. 2;
Hildesheim, spicel. 2, de Delir. et Mania, Jacchinus,
Arculanus on Rhasis, Guianerius and Mercurialis, reckon up
this overmuch waking as a principal cause.



MEMB. III

SUBSECT. I.-- Passions and Perturbations of the Mind, how
they cause Melancholy.

As that gymnosophist in Plutarch made answer to Alexander
(demanding which spake best), Every one of his fellows did
speak better than the other: so I may say of these causes; to
him that shall require which is the greatest, every one is
more grievous than other, and this of passion the greatest of
all. A most frequent and ordinary cause of melancholy, fulmen
perturbationum (Piccolomineus calls it) this thunder and
lightning of perturbation, which causeth such violent and
speedy alterations in this our microcosm, and many times
subverts the good estate and temperature of it. For as the
body works upon the mind by his bad humours,troubling the
spirits, sending gross fumes into the brain, and so per
consequens disturbing the soul, and all the faculties of it,
"-- Corpus onustum,
Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravat una."
(Hor. "The body oppressed by yesterday's vices weighs down
the spirit also.")
with fear, sorrow, &c.,which are ordinary symptoms of this
disease: so on the other side, the mind most effectually
works upon the body, producing by his passions and
perturbations miraculous alterations, as melancholy, despair,
cruel diseases, and sometimes death itself. Insomuch that it
is most true which Plato saith in his Charmides, omnia
corporis mala ab animum procedere; all the mischiefs of the
body proceed from the soul: and Democritus in Plutarch
urgeth, Damnatum iri animam a corpore, if the body should in
this behalf bring an action against the soul, surely the soul
would be cast and convicted, that by her supine negligence
had caused such inconveniences, having authority over the
body, and using it for an instrument, as a smith does his
hammer (saith Cyprian), imputing all those vices and maladies
to the mind. Even so doth Philostratus; non coinquinatur
corpus, nisi consensu animae; the body is not corrupted, but
by the soul. Lodovcus Vives will have such turbulent
commotions proceed from ignorance and indiscretion. All
philosophers impute the miseries of the body to the soul,
that should have governed it better, by command of reason,
and hath not done it. The Stoics are altogether of opinion
(as Lipsius and Piccolomineus record), that a wise man should
be apa??? (apathes) without all manner of passions and
perturbations whatsoever, as Seneca reports of Cato, the
Greeks of Socrates and Io. Aubanus of a nation in Africa, so
free from passion, or rather so stupid, that if they be
wounded with a sword, they will only look back. Lactantius 2
instit. will exclude "fear from a wise man:" others except
all, some the greatest passions. But let them dispute how
they will, set down in Thesi, give precepts to the contrary;
we find that of Lemnius true by common experience; "No mortal
man is free from these perturbations: or if he be so, sure he
is either a god, or a block." They are born and bred with us,
we have them from our parents by inheritance. A parentibus
habemus malum hunc assens, saith Pelezius, Nascitur una
nobiscum, aliturque, 'tis propagated from Adam, Cain was
melancholy, as Austin hath it, and who is not? Good
discipline, education, philosophy, divinity (I cannot deny),
may mitigate and restrain these passions in some few men at
some times, but most part they domineer, and are so violent,
that as a torrent (torrens velut aggere rupto) bears down all
before, and overflows his banks: sternit agros, sternit sata,
(lays waste the fields, prostrates the crops), they overwhelm
reason, judgment, and pervert the temperature of the body;
Fertur equis auriga, nec audit currus habenas. Now such a man
(saith Austin) "that is so led, in a wise man's eye, is no
better than he that stands upon his head." It is doubted by
some, Gravioresne morbi a perturbationibus, an ab humoribus,
whether humours or perturbations cause the more grievous
maladies. But we find that of our Saviour, Mat. xxvi, 41,
most true, "The spirit is willing, the flesh is weak," we
cannot resist; and this of Philo Judaeus, "Perturbations
often offend the body, and are most frequent causes of
melancholy, turning it out of the hinges of his health."
Vives compares them to "Winds upon the sea, some only move as
those great gales, but others turbulent quite overturn the
ship." Those which are light, easy, and more seldom, to our
thinking, do us little harm, and are therefore contemned of
us: yet if they be reiterated, "as the rain (saith Austin)
doth a stone, so do these perturbations penetrate the mind:"
and (as one observes) "produce a habit of melancholy at the
last, which having gotten the mastery in our souls, may well
be called diseases."

How these passions produce this effect, Agrippa hath handled
at large, Occult. Philos. l. 11. c. 63. Cardan, l. 14,
subtil. Lemnius, l. 1, c. 12, de occult. nat. mir. et lib. 1.
cap. 16. Suarez, Met. disput. 18. sect. 1, art. 25. T.
Bright, cap. 12. of his Melancholy Treatise. Wright the
Jesuit in his book of the Passions of the Mind, &c. Thus in
brief; to our imagination cometh by the outward sense or
memory, some object to be known (residing in the foremost
part of the brain), which he misconceiving or amplifying
presently communicates to the heart, the seat of all
affections. The pure spirits forthwith flock from the brain
to the heart, by certain secret channels, and signify what
good or bad object was presented; which immediately bends
itself to prosecute, or avoid it; and withal, draweth with it
other humours to help it: so in pleasure, concur great store
of purer spirits; in sadness, much melancholy blood; in ire,
choler. If the imagination be very apprehensive, intent, and
violent, it sends great store of spirits to, or from the
heart, and makes a deeper impression, and greater tumult, as
the humours in the body be likewise prepared, and the
temperature itself ill or well disposed, the passions are
longer and stronger; so that the first step and fountain of
all our grievances in this kind, is laesa imaginatio, which
misinforming the heart, causeth all these distemperatures,
alteration, and confusion of spirits and humours. By means of
which, so disturbed, concoction is hindered, and the
principal parts are much debilitated; as Dr. Navarra well
declared, being consulted by Montanus about a melancholy Jew.
The spirits so confounded, the nourishment must needs be
abated, bad humours increased, crudities and thick spirits
engendered with melancholy blood. The other parts cannot
perform their functions, having the spirits drawn from them
by vehement passion, but fail in sense and motion; so we look
upon a thing, and see it not; hear, and observe not; which
otherwise would much affect us, had we been free. I may
therefore conclude with Arnoldus, Maxima vis est phantasiae,
et huic uni fere, non autem corporis intemperiei, omnis
melancholiae causa est ascribenda: "Great is the force of
imagination, and much more ought the cause of melancholy to
be ascribed to this alone, than to the distemperature of the
body." Of which imagination, because it hath so great a
stroke in producing this malady, and is so powerful of
itself; it will not be improper to my discourse, to make a
brief digression, and speak of the force of it, and how it
causeth this alteration. Which manner of digression howsoever
some dislike, as frivolous and impertinent, yet I am of
Beroaldus's opinion, "Such digressions do mightily delight
and refresh a weary reader, they are like sauce to a bad
stomach, and I do therefore most willingly use them."



SUBSECT. II.-- Of the force of Imagination.


WHAT imagination is, I have sufficiently declared in my
digression of the anatomy of the soul. I will only now point
at the wonderful effects and power of it; which, as it is
eminent in all, so most especially it rageth in melancholy
persons, in keeping the species of objects so long,
mistaking, amplifying them by continual and strong
meditation, until at length it produceth in some parties real
effects, causeth this and many other maladies. And although
this fantasy of ours be a subordinate faculty to reason, and
should be ruled by it, yet in many men, through inward or
outward distemperatures, defect of organs, which are unapt,
or otherwise contaminated, it is likewise unapt, or hindered,
and hurt. This we see verified in sleepers, which by reason
of humours and concourse of vapours troubling the fantasy,
imagine many times absurd and prodigious things, and in such
as are troubled with incubus, or witch-ridden (as we call
it), if they lie on their backs, they suppose an old woman
rides, and sits so hard upon them, that they are almost
stifled for want of breath; when there is nothing offends,
but a concourse of bad humours, which trouble the fantasy.
This is likewise evident in such as walk in the night in
their sleep, and do strange feats: these vapours move the
fantasy, the fantasy the appetite, which moving the animal
spirits causeth the body to walk up and down as if they were
awake. Fracast. l. 3. de intellect., refers all ecstasies to
this force of imagination such as lie who1e days together in
a trance: as that priest whom Celsus speaks of; that could
separate himself from his senses when he list, and lie like a
dead man, void of life and sense. Cardan brags of himself,
that he could do as much, and that when he list. Many times
such men when they come to themselves, tell strange things of
heaven and hell, what visions they have seen; as that St.
Owen, in Matthew Paris, that went into St. Patrick's
purgatory, and the monk of Evesham in the same author. Those
common apparitions in Bede and Gregory, Saint Bridget's
revelations, Wier. l. 3. de lamiis, c. 11. Caesar Vanninus,
in his Dialogues, &c. reduceth (as I have formerly said),
with all those tales of witches' progresses, dancing, riding,
transformations, operations, &c. to the force of imagination,
and the devil's illusions. The like effects almost are to be 
seen in such as are awake: how many chimeras, antics, golden
mountains and castles in the air do they build unto
themselves? I appeal to painters, mechanicians,
mathematicians. Some ascribe all vices to a false and corrupt
imagination, anger, revenge, lust, ambition, covetousness,
which prefers falsehood before that which is right and good,
deluding the soul with false shows and suppositions.
Bernardus Penottus will have heresy and superstition to
proceed from this fountain; as he falsely imagineth, so he
believeth; and as he conceiveth of it, so it must be, and it
shall be, contra gentes, he will have it so. But most
especially in passions and affections, it shows strange and
evident effects: what will not a fearful man conceive in the
dark? What strange forms of bugbears, devils, witches,
goblins? Livater imputes the greatest cause of spectrums, and
the like apparitions, to fear, which above all other passions
begets the strongest imagination (saith Wierus), and so
likewise, love, sorrow, joy, &c. Some die suddenly, as she
that saw her son come from the battle at Cannae, &c. Jacob
the patriarch, by force of imagination, made speckled lambs,
laying speckled rods before his sheep. Persina that
Aethiopian queen in Heliodorus, by seeing the picture of
Perseus and Andromeda, instead of a blackamoor, was brought
to bed of a fair white child. In imitation of whom belike, a
hard-favoured fellow in Greece, because he and his wife were
both deformed, to get a good brood of ehildren,
Elegantissimas imagines in thalamo collocavit, &c., hung the
fairest pictures he could buy for money in his chamber, "That
his wife by frequent sight of them, might conceive and bear
such children." And if we may believe Bale, one of Pope
Nicholas the Third's concubines by seeing of a bear was
brought to bed of a monster. "If a woman (saith Lemnius), at
the time of her conception think of another man present or
absent, the child will be like him." Great bellied women,
when they long, yield us prodigious examples in this kind, as
moles, warts, scars, harelips, monsters, especially caused in
their children by force of a depraved fantasy in them: Ipsam
speciam quam animo effigiat, foetui inducit: She imprints
that stamp upon her child which she conceives unto herself.
And therefore Lodovicus Vives, lib. 2. de Christ. foem. gives
a special caution to great-bellied women, "That they do not
admit such absurd conceits and cogitations, but by all means
avoid those horrible objects, heard or seen, or filthy
spectacles." Some will laugh, weep, sigh, groan; blush,
tremble, sweat, at such things as are suggested unto them by
their imagination. Avicenna speaks of one that could cast
himself into a palsy when he list; and some can imitate the
tunes of birds and beasts that they can hardly be discerned:
Dagebertus' and Saint Francis' scars and wounds, like those
of Christ's (if at the least any such were), Agrippa
supposeth to have happened by force of imagination: that some
are turned to wolves, from men to women, and women again to
men (which is constantly believed) to the same imagination;
or from men to asses, dogs, or any other shapes. Wierus
ascribes all those famous transformations to imagination;
that in hydrophobia they seem to see the picture of a dog,
still in their water, that melancholy men and sick men
conceive so many fantastical visions, apparitions to
themselves, and have such absurd apparitions, as that they
are kings, lords, cocks, bears, apes, owls; that they are
heavy, light, transparent, great and little, senseless and
dead (as shall be showed more at large, in our sections of
symptoms), can be imputed to nought else, but to a corrupt,
false, and violent imagination. It works not in sick and
melancholy men only, but even most forcibly sometimes in such
as are sound: it makes them suddenly sick, and alters their
temperature in an instant. And sometimes a strong conceit or
apprehension, as Valesius proves, will take away diseases: in
both kinds it will produce real effects. Men, if they see but
another man tremble, giddy or sick of some fearful disease,
their apprehension and fear is so strong in this kind, that
they will have the same disease. Or if by some soothsayer,
wiseman, fortune-teller, or physician, they be told they
shall have such a disease, they will so seriously apprehend
it, that they will instantly labour of it. A thing familiar
in China (saith Riccius the Jesuit), "If it be told them they
shall be sick on such a day, when that day comes they will
surely be sick, and will be so terribly afflicted, that
sometimes they die upon it." Dr. Cotta in his discovery of
ignorant practitioners of physic, cap 8. hath two strange
stories to this purpose, what fancy is able to do. The one of
a parson's wife in Northamptonshire, An. 1607, that coming to
a physician, and told by him that she was troubled with the
sciatica, as he conjectured (a disease she was free from),
the same night after her return, upon his words, fell into a
grievous fit of a sciatica: and such another example he hath
of another good wife, that was so troubled with the cramp,
after the same manner she came by it, because her physician
did but name it. Sometimes death itself is caused by force of
fantasy. I have heard of one that coming by chance in company
of him that was thought to be sick of the plague (which was
not so) fell down suddenly dead. Another was sick of the
plague with conceit. One seeing his fellow let blood falls
down in a swoon. Another (saith Cardan out of Aristotle),
fell down dead (which is familiar to women at any ghastly
sight), seeing but a man hanged. A Jew in France (saith
Lodovicus Vives), came by chance over a dangerous passage or
plank, that lay over a brook in the dark, without harm, the
next day perceiving what danger he was in, fell down dead.
Many will not believe such stories to be true, but laugh
commonly; and deride when they hear of them; but let these
men consider with themselves, as Peter Byarus illustrates it,
If they were set to walk upon a plank on high, they would be
giddy, upon which they dare securely walk upon the ground.
Many (saith Agrippa), "strong-hearted men otherwise, tremble 
at such sights, dazzle, and are sick, if they look but down
from a high place, and what moves them but conceit?" As some
are so molested by fantasy; so some again, by fancy alone,
and a good conceit, are as easily recovered. We see commonly
the tooth-ache, gout, falling-sickness, biting of a mad dog,
and many such maladies, cured by spells, words, characters,
and charms, and many green wounds by that now so much used
Unguentum Armarium, magnetically cured, which Crollius and
Goclenius in a book of late hath defended, Libavius in a just
tract as stiffly contradicts, and most men controvert. All
the world knows there is no virtue in such charms or cures,
but a strong conceit and opinion alone, as Pomponatius holds,
"which forceth a motion of the humours, spirits, and blood,
which takes away the cause of the malady from the parts
affected." The like we may say of our magical effects,
superstitious cures, and such as are done by mountebanks and
wizards. "As by wicked incredulity many men are hurt (so
saith Wierus of charms, spells, &c.), we find in our
experience, by the same means many are relieved." An empiric
oftentimes, and a silly chirurgeon, doth more strange cures
than a rational physician. Nymannus gives a reason, because
the patient puts his confidence in him, which Avicenna
"prefers before art, precepts, and all remedies whatsoever."
'Tis opinion alone (saith Cardan), that makes or mars
physicians, and he doth the best cures, according to
Hippocrates, in whom most trust. So diversely doth this
fantasy of ours affect, turn, and wind, so imperiously
command our bodies, which as another Proteus, or a chameleon,
can take all shapes; and is of such force (as Ficinus adds),
that it can work upon others, as well as ourselves." How can
otherwise blear eyes in one man cause the like affection in
another? Why doth one man's yawning make another yawn? One
man's pissing provoke a second many times to do the like? Why
doth scraping of trenchers offend a third, or hacking of
flies? Why doth a carcass bleed when the murderer is brought
before it, some weeks after the murder hath been done? Why do
witches and old women fascinate and bewitch children: but as
Wierus, Paracelsus, Cardan, Mizaldus, Valleriola, Caesar
Vanninus, Campanella, and many philosophers think, the
forcible imagination of the one party moves and alters the
spirits of the other. Nay more, they can cause and cure not
only diseases, maladies and several infirmities, by this
means, as Avicenna de anim. l. 4. sect. 4. supposeth in
parties remote, but move bodies from their places, cause
thunder, lightning, tempests, which opinion Alkindus,
Paracelsus, and some others, approve of: So that I may
certainly conclude this strong conceit or imagination is
astrum hominis, and the rudder of this our ship, which reason
should steer, but overborne by fantasy cannot manage, and so
suffers itself and this whole vessel of ours to be overruled,
and often overturned. Read more of this in Wierus, l.3. de
Lamiis, c. 8, 9, 10. Franciscus, Valesias med. controv. l. 5.
cont. 6. Marcellus Donatus, l. 2. c. 1. de hist. med.
mirabil. Levinus Lemnius, de occult. nat. mir. l. 1. c. 12.
Cardan, l. 18. de rerum var. Corn. Agrippa, de occult.
philos. cap. 64, 65. Camerarius, 1 cent. cap. 54. horarum
subcis. Nymannus, morat. de Imag. Laurentius, and him that is
instar omnium, Fienus, a famous physician of Antwerp that
wrote three books de viribus imaginationis. I have thus far 
digressed, because this imagination is the medium deferens of
passions, by whose means they work and produce many times
prodigious effects: and as the fantasy is more or less
intended or remitted, and their humours disposed, so do
perturbations move, more or less, and take deeper impression.



SUBSECT. III.-- Division of Perturbations.


Perturbations and passions, which trouble the fantasy, though
they dwell between the confines of sense and reason, yet they
rather follow sense than reason because they are drowned in
corporeal organs of sense. They are commonly reduced into two
inclinations, irascible and concupiscible. The Thomists
subdivide them into eleven, six in the coveting, and five in
the invading. Aristotle reduceth all to pleasure and pain,
Plato to love and hatred, Vives to good and bad. If good, it
is present, and then we absolutely joy and love; or to come,
and then we desire and hope for it. If evil, we absolutely
hate it; if present, it is sorrow; if to come, fear. These
four passions Bernard compares "to the wheels of a chariot,
by which we are carried in this world." All other passions
are subordinate unto these four, or six, as some will: love,
joy, desire, hatred, sorrow, fear; the rest, as anger, envy,
emulation, pride, jealousy, anxiety, mercy, shame,
discontent, despair, ambition, avarice, &c., are reducible
unto the first; and if they be immoderate, they consume the
spirits, and melancholy is especially caused by them. Some
few discreet men there are, that can govern themselves, and
curb in these inordinate affections, by religion, philosophy,
and such divine precepts, of meekness, patience, and the
like; but most part for want of government, out of
indiscretion, ignorance, they suffer themselves wholly to be
led by sense, and are so far from repressing rebellious
inclinations, that they give all encouragement unto them,
leaving the reins, and using all provocations to further
them: bad by nature, worse by art, discipline, custom,
education, and a perverse will of their own, they follow on,
wheresoever their unbridled affection will transport them,
and do more out of custom, self-will, than out of reason.
Contumax voluntas, as Melancthon calls it, malum facit: this
stubborn will of ours perverts judgment, which sees and knows
what should and ought to be done, and yet will not do it.
Mancipia gulae, slaves to their several lusts and appetite,
they precipitate and plunge themselves into a labyrinth of
cares blinded with lust, blinded with ambition; "They seek
that at God's hands which they may give unto themselves, if
they could but refrain from those cares and perturbations,
wherewith they continually macerate their minds." But giving
way to these violent passions of fear, grief, shame, revenge,
hatred, malice, &c., they are torn in pieces. as Actaeon was
with his dogs, and crucify their own souls.



SUBSECT. IV.-- Sorrow a cause of Melancholy.


Sorrow. Insanus dolor.] In this catalogue of passions, which
so much torment the soul of man, and cause this malady (for I
will briefly speak of them all, and in their order). the
first place in this irascible appetite, may justly be
challenged by sorrow. An inseparable companion, "The mother
and daughter of melancholy, her epitome, symptom, and chief
cause:" as Hippocrates hath it, they beget one another, and
tread in a ring, for sorrow is both cause and symptom of this
disease. How it is a symptom shall be shown in its place.
That it is a cause all the world acknowledgeth, Dolor
nonnullus insaniae causa fuit, et aliorum morborum
insanabilium, saith Plutarch to Apollonius; a cause of
madness, a cause of many other diseases, a sole cause of this
mischief, Lemnius calls it. So doth Rhasis, cont. l. 1.
tract. 9. Guianerius, Tract. 15, c. 5. And if it take root
once, it ends in despair, as Felix Plater observes, and as in
Cebes' table may well be coupled with it. Chrysostom in his
seventeenth epistle to Olympia, describes it to be a cruel
torture of the soul, a most inexplicable grief, poisoned
worm, consuming body and soul, and gnawing the very heart, a
perpetual executioner, continual night, profound darkness, a
whirlwind, a tempest, an ague not appearing, heating worse
than any fire, and a battle that hath no end. It crucifies
worse than any tyrant; no torture, no strappado, no bodily
punishment is like unto it. 'Tis the eagle without question
which the poets feigned to gnaw Prometheus' heart, and "no
heaviness is like unto the heaviness of the heart," Eccles.
xxv. 15, 16. "Every perturbation is a misery, but grief a
cruel torment," a domineering passion: as in old Rome, when
the Dictator was created, all inferior magistracies ceased;
when grief appears, all other passions vanish. "It dries up
the bones," saith Solomon, ch. 17. Prov., "makes them hollow-
eyed, pale, and lean, furrow-faced, to have dead looks,
wrinkled brows, shrivelled cheeks, dry bodies, and quite
perverts their temperature that are misaffected with it." As
Eleonora, that exiled mournful duchess (in our English Ovid),
laments to her noble husband Humphrey, duke of Glocester

"Sawest thou those eyes in whose sweet cheerful look
Duke Humphry once such joy and pleasure took,
Sorrow hath so despoil'd me of all grace,
Thou could'st not say this was my Elnor's face.
Like a foul Gorgon," &c.

"it hinders concoction, refrigerates the heart, takes away
stomach, colour, and sleep, thickens the blood (Fernelius l.
1. cap. 18, de morb. causis), contaminates the spirits."
(Piso.) Overthrows the natural heat, perverts the good estate
of body and mind, and makes them weary of their lives, cry
out, howl and roar for very anguish of their souls. David
confessed as much, Psalm xxxviii. 8, "I have roared for the
very disquietness of my heart." And Psalm cxix. 4 part, 4 v.
"Mv soul melteth away for very heaviness," v. 83, "I am like
a bottle in the smoke." Antiochus complained that he could
not sleep. and that his heart fainted for grief, Christ
himself, Vir dolorum, out of an apprehension of grief; did
sweat blood, Mark xiv. "His soul was heavy to the death. and
no sorrow was like unto his." Crato consil. 21, l. 2, gives
instance in one that was so melancholy by reason of grief;
and Montanus consil. 30, in a noble matron, "that had no
other cause of this mischief." I. S. D. in Hildesheim, fully
cured a patient of his that was much troubled with
melancholy, and for many years, "but afterwards, by a little
occasion of sorrow, he fell into his former fits, and was
tormented as before." Examples are common, how it causeth
melancholy, desperation, and sometimes death itself; for
(Eccles. xxxviii. 15), "Of heaviness comes death; worldly
sorrow causeth death." 2 Cor. vii. 10, Psalm xxxi. 10. "My
life is wasted with heaviness, and my years with mourning."
Why was Hecuba said to be turned to a dog? Niobe into a
stone? but that for grief she was senseless and stupid.
Severus the Emperor died for grief; and how many myriads
besides? Tanta illi est feritas, tanta est insania luctus.
Melancthon gives a reason of it, "the gathering of much
melancholy blood about the heart, which collection
extinguisheth the good spirits, or at least dulleth
them,sorrow strikes the heart, makes it tremble and pine
away, with great pain; and the black blood drawn from the
spleen, and diffused under the ribs, on the left side, makes
those perilous hypochondriacal convulsions, which happen to
them that are troubled with sorrow."



SUBSECT. V.-- Fear, a Cause.


COUSIN-GERMAN to sorrow, is fear, or rather a sister, fidus
Achates, and continual companion, an assistant and a
principal agent in procuring of this mischief; a cause and
symptom as the other. In a word, as Virgil of the Harpies, I
may justly say of them both,

Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec saevior ulla
Pestis et Ira Deum stygiis sese extulit undis."
"A sadder monster, or more cruel plague so fell,
Or vengeance of the gods, ne'er came from Styx or Hell."

This foul fiend of fear was worshipped heretofore as a god by
the Lacedaemonians, and most of those other torturing
affections, and so was sorrow amongst the rest, under the
name of Angerona Dea, they stood in such awe of them, as
Austin de Civitat. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 8. noteth out of Varro,
fear was commonly adored and painted in their temples with a
lion's head; and as Macrobius records l. 10. Saturnalium; "in
the calends of January, Angerona had her holy day, to whom in
the temple of Volupia, or goddess of pleasure, their augurs
and bishops did yearly sacrifice; that, being propitious to
them, she might expel all cares, anguish, and vexation of the
mind for that year following." Many lamentable effects this
fear causeth in men, as to be red, pale, tremble, sweat, it
makes sudden cold and heat to come over all the body,
palpitation of the heart, syncope, &c. It amazeth many men
that are to speak, or show themselves in public assemblies,
or before some great personages, as Tully confessed of
himself, that he trembled still at the beginning of his
speech; and Demosthenes, that great orator of Greece, before
Philippus. It confounds voice and memory, as Lucian wittingly
brings in Jupiter Tragoedus, so much afraid of his auditory,
when he was to make a speech to the rest of the gods, that he
could not utter a ready word, but was compelled to use
Mercury's help in prompting. Many men are so amazed and
astonished with fear, they know not where they are, what they
say, what they do, and that which is worse, it tortures them
many days before with continual affrights and suspicion. It
hinders most honourable attempts, and makes their hearts
ache, sad and heavy. They that live in fear are never free,
resolute, secure, never merry, but in continual pain: that,
as Vives truly said, Nulla est miseria major quam metus, no
greater misery, no rack, nor torture like unto it, ever
suspicious, anxious, solicitous, they are childishly drooping
without reason, without judgment, "especially if some
terrible object be offered," as Plutarch hath it. It causeth
oftentimes sudden madness, and almost all manner of diseases,
as I have sufficiently illustrated in my digression of the
force of imagination, and shall do more at large in my
section of terrors. Fear makes our imagination conceive what
it list, invites the devil to come to us, as Agrippa and
Cardan avouch, and tyrannizeth over our fantasy more than all
other afflictions, especially in the dark. We see this
verified in most men, as Lavater saith, Quae metuunt,
fingunt; what they fear they conceive, and feign unto
themselves; they think they see goblins, hags, devils, and
many times become melancholy thereby. Cardan subtil. lib. 18.
hath an example of such an one, so caused to be melancholy
(by sight of a bugbear) all his life after. Augustus Caesar
durst not sit in the dark, nisi aliquo assidente, saith
Suetonius, Nunquam tenebris evigilavit. And 'tis strange what
women and children will conceive unto themselves, if they go
over a church-yard in the night, lie, or be alone in a dark
room, how they sweat and tremble on a sudden. Many men are
troubled with future events, foreknowledge of their fortunes,
destinies, as Severus the emperor, Adrian and Domitian, Quod
sciret ultimum vitae diem, saith Suetonius, valde solicitus,
much tortured in mind because he foreknew his end; with many
such, of which I shall speak more opportunely in another
place. Anxiety, mercy, pity, indignation, &c., and such
fearful branches derived from these two stems of fear and
sorrow, I voluntarily omit; read more of them in Carolus
Pascalius, Dandinus, &c.



SUBSECT. VI.-- Shame and Disgrace, Causes.


SHAME and disgrace cause most violent passions and bitter
pangs. Ob pudorem et dedecus publicum, ob errorem coimmissum
saepe moventur generosi animi (Felix Plater lib. 3. de
alienat. mentis): Generous minds are often moved with shame,
to despair for some public disgrace. And he, saith Philo lib.
2. de provid. Dei. "that subjects himself to fear, grief,
ambition, shame, is not happy, but altogether miserable,
tortured with continual labour, care, and misery." It is as
forcible a batterer as any of the rest: Many men neglect the
tumults of the world, and care not for glory, and yet they
are afraid of infamy, repulse, disgrace, (Tul. offic. l. 1.)
they can severely contemn pleasure, bear grief indifferently,
but they are quite battered and broken with reproach and
obloquy:" (siquidem vita et fama pari passu ambulant) and are
so dejected many times for some public injury, disgrace, as a
box on the ear by their inferior, to be overcome of their
adversary, foiled in the field, to be out in a speech, some
foul fact committed or disclosed, &c. that they dare not come
abroad all their lives after, but melancholize in corners,
and keep in holes. The most generous spirits are most subject
to it; Spiritus altos frangit et generosos: Hieronymus.
Aristotle, because he could not understand the motion of
Euripus, for grief and shame drowned himself: Coelius
Rodiginus antiquar. lec. lib. 29. cap. 8. Homerus pudore
consumptus, was swallowed up with this passion of shame
"because he could not unfold the fisherman's riddle."
Sophocles killed himself, for that a tragedy of his was
hissed off the stage: Valer. Max. lib. 9. cap. 12. Lucretia
stabbed herself, and so did Cleopatra, "when she saw that she
was reserved for a triumph, to avoid the infamy." Antonius
the Roman, "after he was overcome of his enemy, for three
days' space sat solitary in the fore-part of the ship,
abstaining from all company, even of Cleopatra herself; and
afterwards for very shame butchered himself," Plutarch vita
ejus. "Apollonius Rhodius wilfully banished himself forsaking
his country, and all his dear friends, because he was out in
reciting his poems," Plinius lib. 7. cap. 23. Ajax ran mad,
because his arms were adjudged to Ulysses. In China 'tis an
ordinary thing for such as are excluded in those famous
trials of theirs, or should take degrees, for shame and grief
to lose their wits, Mat. Riccius expedit. ad Sinus, l. 3. c.
9. Hostratus the friar took that book which Reuclin had writ
against him, under the name of Epist. obscurorum virorum, so
to heart, that for shame and grief he made away himself;
Jovius in elogiis. A grave and learned minister, and an
ordinary preacher at Alcmar in Holland, was (one day as he
walked in the fields for his recreation) suddenly taken with
a lax or looseness, and thereupon compelled to retire to the
next ditch; but being surprised at unawares, by some
gentlewomen of his parish wandering that way, was so abashed,
that he did never after show his head in public, or come into
the pulpit, but pined away with melancholy:  (Pet. Forestus
med. observat. lib. 10. observat. 12.) So shame amongst other
passions can play his prize.

I know there be many base, impudent, brazen-faced rogues,
that will Nulla pallescere culpa, be moved with nothing, take
no infamy or disgrace to heart, laugh at all; let them be
proved perjured, stigmatized, convict rogues, thieves,
traitors, lose their ears, be whipped, branded, carted,
pointed at, hissed, reviled, and derided with Baillo the Bawd
in Plautus, they rejoice at it, Cantores probos; "babae and
bombax," what care they? We have too many such in our times,

"-- Exclamat Melicerta perisse
-- Frontem de rebus."
("Melicerta exclaims, all shame has vanished from human
transactions")

Yet a modest man, one that hath grace, a generous spirit,
tender of his reputation, will be deeply wounded, and so
grievously affected with it, that he had rather give myriads
of crowns, lose his life, than suffer the least defamation of
honour, or blot in his good name. And if so be that he cannot
avoid it, as a nightingale, Quae cantando victo moritur
(saith Mizaldus), dies for shame if another bird sing better,
he languisheth and pineth away in the anguish of his spirit.



SUBSECT. VII.-- Envy, Malice, Hatred, Causes.


Envy and malice are two links of this chain, and both, as
Guianerius Tract. 15. cap. 2. proves out of Galen 3.
Aphorism. com. 22. "cause this malady by themselves,
especially if their bodies be otherwise disposed to
melancholy". 'Tis Valescus de Taranta, and Foelix Platerus'
observation, "Envy so gnaws many men's come altogether
melancholy" And therefore belike Solomon, Prov. xiv. 13.
calls it, "the rotting of the bones," Cyprian, vulnus
occultum;

"-- Siculi non invenire tyranni
Majus tormentum"


The Sicilian tyrants never invented the like torment. It
crucifies their souls, withers their bodies, makes them
hollow-eyed, pale, lean, and ghastly to behold, Cyprian ser.
2. de zelo et livore. "As a moth gnaws a garment, so," saith
Chrysostom, "doth envy consume a man; to be a living anatomy:
a skeleton, to be a lean and pale carcass, quickened with a
fiend," Hall in Charact. for so often as an envious wretch
sees another man prosper, to be enriched, to thrive, and be
fortunate in the world, to get honours, offices, or the like,
he repines and grieves.

"-- Intabescitque videndo
Successus hominum -- suppliciumque suum est"
(Ovid. He pines away at the sight of another's success -- It
is his special torture.)

He tortures himself if his equal, friend, neighbour, be
preferred, commended, do well; if he understand of it, it
galls him afresh; and no greater pain can come to him than to
hear of another man's well-doing; 'tis a dagger at his heart
every such object. He looks at him as they that fell down in
Lucian's rock of honour, with an envious eye, and will damage
himself, to do another a mischief: Atque cadet subito, dum
super hoste cadat. As he did in Aesop, lose one eye
willingly, that his fellow might lose both, or that rich man
in Quintilian that poisoned the flowers in his garden,
because his neighbour's bees should get no more honey from
them. His whole life is sorrow, and every word he speaks a
satire: nothing fats him but other men's ruins. For to speak
in a word, envy is nought else but Tristita de bonis alienis,
sorrow for other men's good, be it present, past, or to come:
et gaudium de adversis, and joy at their harms, opposite to
mercy, which grieves at other men's mischances, and
misaffects the body in another kind; so Damascen defines it,
lib. 2. de orthod. fid. Thomas 2. 2. quaest. 36. art. 1.,
Aristotle l. 2. Rhet. c. 4. et 10., Plato Philebo., Tully 3.
Tusc. Greg. Nic. l. de virt. animae, c. 12., Basil. de
Invidia, Pindarus Od. 1. ser. 5. and we find it true. 'Tis a
common disease, and almost natural to us, as Tacitus holds,
to envy another man's prosperity. And 'tis in most men an
incurable disease. "I have read," saith Marcus Aurelius,
"Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee authors; I have consulted with many
wise men for a remedy for envy, I could find none, but to
renounce all happiness, and to be a wretch, and miserable for
ever." 'Tis the beginning of hell in this life, and a passion
not to be excused. "Every other sin hath some pleasure
annexed to it, or will admit of an excuse; envy alone wants
both. Other sins last but for awhile; the gut may be
satisfied, anger remit, hatred hath an end, envy never
ceaseth." Cardan lib. 2. de sap. Divine and human examples
are very familiar; you may run and read them, as that of Saul
and David, Cain and Abel, angebat illum non proprium
peccatum, sed fratris prosperitas, saith Theodoret, it was
his brother's good fortune galled him. Rachel envied her
sister, being barren, Gen. xxx. Joseph's brethren, him, Gen.
xxxvii. David had a touch of this vice, as he confesseth, Ps.
37. Jeremy and Habakkuk, they repined at others' good, but in
the end they corrected themselves. Ps. 75. "fret not
thyself," &c. Domitian spited Agricola for his worth, "that a
private man should be so much glorified." Cecinna was envied
of his fellow-citizens, because he was more richly adorned.
But of all others, women are most weak, ob pulchritudinem
invidae sunt foeminae (Musaeus) aut amat, aut odit, nihil est
tertium (Granaiensis). They love or hate, no medium amongst
them. Implacabiles plerumque laesae mulieres, Agrippina like,
"A woman if she see her neighbour more neat or elegant,
richer, in tires, jewels, or apparel is enraged, and like a
lioness sets upon her husband, rails at her, scoffs at her,
and cannot abide her;" so the Roman ladies in Tacitus did at
Solonina, Cecinna's wife, "because she had a better horse,
and better furniture," as if she had hurt them with it; they
were much offended. In like sort our gentlewomen do at their
usual meetings, one repines or scoffs at another's bravery
and happiness. Myrsine, an Attic wench, was murdered of her
fellows, "because she did excel the rest in beauty,"
Constantine Agricult. l. 11. c. 7. Every village will yield
such examples.



SUBSECT. VIII.-- Emulation, Hatred, Faction, Desire of
Revenge, Causes.


OUT of this root of envy spring those feral branches of
faction, hatred, livor, emulation, which cause the like
grievances, and are, serrae animae, the saws of the soul,
consternationes plenae affectus, affections full of desperate
amazement; or as Cyprian describes emulation, it is "a moth
of the soul, a consumption to make another man's happiness
his misery, to torture, crucify, and execute himself, to eat
his own heart. Meat and drink can do such men no good, they
do always grieve, sigh, and groan, day and night without
intermission, their breast is torn asunder:" and a little
after, "Whomsoever he is whom thou dost emulate and envy, he
may avoid thee, but thou canst neither avoid him, nor
thyself; wheresoever thou art he is with thee, thine enemy is
ever in thy breast, thy destruction is within thee, thou art
a captive, bound hand and foot, as long as thou art malicious
and envious, and canst not be comforted. It was the devil's
overthrow;" and whensoever thou art thoroughly affected with
this passion, it will be thine. Yet no perturbation so
frequent, no passion so common.

?a? ?e?aµ???? ?e?aµe? ??tee? ?a? te?t??? te?t??,
?a? pt???? pt??? f???ee? ?a? ???d?? ?o?d?
[Kai keramolis keramei koteei kai tektoni tekton
Kai ptolys ptocho phthoneei kai yoidos yoido]

A potter emulates a potter:
One smith envies another
A beggar emulates a beggar,
A singing man his brother.


Every society, corporation, and private family is full of it,
it takes hold almost of all sorts of men, from the prince to
the ploughman, even amongst gossips it is to be seen, scarce
three in a company but there is siding, faction, emulation,
between two of them, some simultas, jar, private grudge,
heart-burning in the midst of them. Scarce two gentlemen
dwell together in the country (if they be not near kin or
linked in marriage), but there is emulation betwixt them and
their servants, some quarrel or some grudge betwixt their
wives or children, friends and followers, some contention
about wealth, gentry, precedency, &c., by means of which,
like the frog in Aesop, "that would swell till she was as big
as an ox, burst herself at last;" they will stretch beyond
their fortunes, callings, and strive so long that they
consume their substance in law-suits, or otherwise in
hospitality, feasting, fine clothes, to get a few bombast
titles, for ambitiosa paupertate laboramus omnes, to outbrave
one another, they will tire their bodies, macerate their
souls, and through contentions or mutual invitations beggar
themselves. Scarce two great scholars in an age, but with
bitter invectives they fall foul one on the other, and their
adherents; Scotists, Thomists, Reals, Nominals, Plato and
Aristotle, Galenists and Paracelsians, &c., it holds in all
professions.

Honest emulation in studies, in all callings is not to be
disliked, 'tis ingeniorum cos, as one calls it, the whetstone
of wit, the nurse of wit and valour, and those noble Romans
out of this spirit did brave exploits. There is a modest
ambition, as Themistocles was roused up with the glory of
Miltiades; Achilles' trophies moved Alexander,

"Ambire semper, stulta confidentia est,
Ambire nunquam, deses arrogantia est."
(Grotius. Epig. lib. 1. "Ambition always, is a foolish
confidence, never, a slothful arrogance.")

'Tis a sluggish humour not to emulate or to sue at all, to
withdraw himself neglect, refrain from such places, honours,
offices, through sloth, niggardliness, fear, bashfulness, or
otherwise, to which by his birth, place, fortunes, education,
he is called, apt, fit, and well able to undergo; but when it
is immoderate, it is a plague and a miserable pain. What a
deal of money did Henry VII. and Francis I. king of France,
spend at that famous interview? and how many vain courtiers,
seeking each to outbrave other, spent themselves, their
livelihood and fortunes, and died beggars?  Adrian the
emperor was so galled with it, that he killed all his equals;
so did Nero. This passion made Dionysius the tyrant banish
Plato and Philoxenus the poet, because they did excel and
eclipse his glory, as he thought; the Romans exile
Coriolanus, confine Camillus, murder Scipio; the Greeks by
ostracism to expel Aristides, Nicias, Alcibiades, imprison
Theseus, make away Phocion, &c. When Richard I. and Philip of
France were fellow soldiers together, at the siege of Acon in
the Holy Land, and Richard had approved himself to be the
more valiant man, insomuch that all men's eyes were upon him,
it so galled Philip, Francum urebat Regis victoria, saith
mine author, tam aegre ferebat Richardi gloriam, ut carpere
dicta, calumniari facta; that he cavilled at all his
proceedings, and fell at length to open defiance; he could
contain no longer, but hasting home, invaded his territories,
and professed open war. "Hatred stirs up contention," Prov.
x. 12., and they break out at last into immortal enmity, into
virulency, and more than Vatinian hate and rage; they
persecute each other, their friends, followers, and all their
posterity, with bitter taunts, hostile wars, scurrile
invectives, libels, calumnies, fire, sword, and the like, and
will not be reconciled. Witness that Guelph and Ghibelline
faction in Italy; that of the Adurni and Fregosi in Genoa;
that of Cneius Papirius, and Quintus Fabius in Rome; Caesar
and Pompey; Orleans and Burgundy in France; York and
Lancaster in England: yea, this passion so rageth many times,
that it subverts not men only, and families, but even
populous cities, Carthage and Corinth can witness as much,
nay flourishing kingdoms are brought into a wilderness by it.
This hatred, malice, faction, and desire of revenge, invented
first all those racks and wheels, strapadoes, brazen bulls,
feral engines, prisons, inquisitions, severe laws to macerate
and torment one another. How happy might we be, and end our
time with blessed days and sweet content, if we could contain
ourselves, and, as we ought to do, put up injuries, learn
humility, meekness, patience, forget and forgive, as in God's
word we are enjoined, compose such final controversies
amongst ourselves, moderate our passions in this kind, "and
think better of others," as Paul would have us, "than of
ourselves: be of like affection one towards another, and not
avenge ourselves, but have peace with all men." But being
that we are so peevish and perverse, insolent and proud, so
factious and seditious, so malicious and envious; we do
invicem angariare, maul and vex one another, torture,
disquiet, and precipitate ourselves into that gulf of woes
and cares, aggravate our misery and melancholy, heap upon us
hell and eternal damnation.



SUBSECT. IX.-- Anger, a Cause.


ANGER, a perturbation, which carries the spirits outwards,
preparing the body to melancholy, and madness itself: Ira
furor brevis est, "anger is temporary madness;" and
Piccolomineus accounts it, one of the three most violent
passions. Areteus sets it down for an especial cause (so doth
Seneca, ep. 18. l. 1.) of this malady. Magninus gives the
reason, Ex frequenti ira supra modum calefiunt; it overheats
their bodies, and if it be too frequent, it breaks out into
manifest madness, saith St. Ambrose. 'Tis a known saying,
Furor fit laesa saepius patientia, the most patient spirit
that is, if he be often provoked, will be incensed to
madness; it will make a devil of a saint: and therefore Basil
(belike) in his Homily de Ira, calls it tenebras rationis,
morbum animae, et daemonem pessimum; the darkening of our
understanding, and a bad angel. Lucian, in Abdicato, tom. 1.
will have this passion to work this effect, especially in 
old men and women. "Anger and calumny (saith he) trouble them 
at first, and after a while break out into madness: many
things cause fury in women, especially if they love or hate
overmuch, or envy, be much grieved or angry; these things by
little and little lead them on to this malady." From a
disposition they proceed to an habit, for there is no
difference between a mad man, and an angry man, in the time
of his fit; anger, as Lactantius describes it. L. de Ira Dei,
ad Donatum, c. 5. is saeva animi tempestas &c., a cruel
tempest of the mind; "making his eyes sparkle fire, and
stare, teeth gnash in his head, his tongue stutter, his face
pale, or red, and what more filthy imitation can be of a mad
man?"

"Ora tument ira, fervescunt sanguine venae,
Lumina Gorgonio saevius angue micant."

They are void of reason, inexorable, blind, like beasts and
monsters for the time, say and do they know not what, curse,
swear, rail, fight, and what not? How can a mad man do more?
as he said in the comedy, Iracundia non sum apud me, I am not
mine own man. If these fits be immoderate, continue long, or
be frequent, without doubt they provoke madness. Montanus,
consil. 21, had a melancholy Jew to his patient, he ascribes
this for a principal cause: Irascebatur levibus de caucis, he
was easily moved to anger. Ajax had no other beginning of his
madness; and Charles the Sixth, that lunatic French king,
fell into this misery, out of the extremity of his passion,
desire of revenge and malice, "incensed against the duke of
Britain, he could neither eat, drink, nor sleep for some days
together, and in the end, about the calends of July, 1392, he
became mad upon his horseback, drawing his sword, striking
such as came near him promiscuously, and so continued all the
days of his life," Aemil. lib. 10. Gal. Hist. Aegesippus de
excid. urbis Hieros. l. 1. c. 37. hath such a story of Herod,
that out of an angry fit, became mad, leaping out of his bed,
he killed Josippus, and played many such bedlam pranks, the
whole court could not rule him for a long time after:
sometimes he was sorry and repented, much grieved for that he
had done, Postquam deferbuit ira, by and by outrageous again.
In hot choleric bodies, nothing so soon causeth madness, as
this passion of anger, besides many other diseases, as
Pelesius observes, cap. 21. l. 1. de hum. afect. causis;
Saguinem imminuit, fel auget: and as Valesius controverts,
Med. controv. lib. 5. contro. 8. many times kills them quite
out. If this were the worst of this passion, it were more
tolerable, "but it ruins and subverts whole towns, cities,
families and kingdoms;" Nulla pestis humano generi pluris
stetit, saith Seneca, de Ira, lib. 1. No plague hath done
mankind so much harm. Look into our histories, and you shall
almost meet with no other subject, but what a company of
hare-brains have done in their rage. We may do well therefore
to put this in our procession amongst the rest; "From all
blindness of heart, from pride, vain-glory, and hypocrisy,
from envy, hatred and malice, anger, and all such pestiferous
perturbations, good Lord deliver us."



SUBSECT. X.-- Discontent, Cares, Miseries, &c. Causes.


DISCONTENTS, cares, crosses, miseries, or whatsoever it is,
that shall cause any molestation of spirits, grief, anguish,
and perplexity, may well be reduced to this head
(preposterously placed here in some men's judgments they may
seem), yet in that Aristotle in his Rhetoric defines these
cares, as he doth envy, emulation, still by grief I think I
may well rank them in this irascible row; being that they are
as the rest, both causes and symptoms of this disease,
producing the like inconveniences, and are most part
accompanied with anguish and pain. The common etymology will
evince it, Cura, quasi cor uro, Dementes curae, insomnes
curae, damnosae curae, tristes, mordaces, carnifices, &c.,
biting, eating, gnawing, cruel, bitter, sick, sad, unquiet,
pale, tetric, miserable, intolerable cares, as the poets call
them, worldly cares, and are as many in number as the sea
sands. Galen, Fernelius, Felix Plater, Valescus de Taranta,
&c., reckon afflictions, miseries, even all these
contentions, and vexations of the mind, as principal causes,
in that they take away sleep, hinder concoction, dry up the
body, and consume the substance of it. They are not so many
in number, but their causes be as divers, and not one of a
thousand free from them, or that can vindicate himself; whom
that Ate dea,

"Per hominum capita molliter ambulans,
Plantas pedum teneras habens:"
"Over men's heads walking aloft,
With tender feet treading so soft,"

Homer's Goddess Ate hath not involved into this discontented
rank, or plagued with some misery or other. Hyginus,  fab.
220, to this purpose hath a pleasant tale. Dame Cura by
chance went over a brook, and taking up some of the dirty
slime, made an image of it; Jupiter eftsoons coming by, put
life to it, but Cura and Jupiter could not agree what name to
give him, or who should own him; the matter was referred to
Saturn as judge, he gave this arbitrement: his name shall be
Homo ab humo, Cura eum possideat quamdiu vivrat, Care shall
have him whilst he lives, Jupiter his soul, and Tellus his
body when he dies. But to leave tales. A general cause, a
continuate cause, an inseparable accident, to all men, is
discontent, care, misery: were there no other particular
affliction (which who is free from?) to molest a man in this
life, the very cogitation of that common misery were enough
to macerate, and make him weary of his life; to think that he
can never be secure, but still in danger, sorrow, grief, and
persecution. For to begin at the hour of his birth, as Pliny
doth elegantly describe it, "he is born naked, and falls a
whining at the very first, he is swaddled and bound up like a
prisoner, cannot help himself; and so he continues to his
life's end." Cujusque ferae pabulum, saith Seneca, impatient
of heat and cold, impatient of labour, impatient of idleness,
exposed to fortune's contumelies. To a naked mariner
Lucretius compares him, cast on shore by shipwreck, cold and
comfortless in an unknown land: no estate, age, sex, can
secure himself from this common misery. "A man that is born
of a woman is of short continuance, and full of trouble." Job
xiv. 1, 22. "And while his flesh is upon him he shall be
sorrowful, and while his soul is in him it shall mourn." "All
his days are sorrow and his travels griefs; his heart also
taketh not rest in the night," Eccles. ii. 23. and ii. 11.
"All that is in it is sorrow and vexation of spirit."
Ingress, progress, regress, egress, much alike: blindness
seizeth on us in the beginning, labour in the middle, grief
in the end, error in all. What day ariseth to us without some
grief; care, or anguish? Or what so secure and pleasing a
morning have we seen, that hath not been overcast before the
evening? One is miserable, another ridiculous, a third
odious. One complains of this grievance, another of that.
Aliquando nervi, aliquando pedes vexant, (Seneca) nunc
distillatio, nunc hepatis morbus; nunc deest, nunc superest
sanguis: now the head aches, then the feet, now the lungs,
then the liver, &c. Huic sensus exuberat, sed est pudori
degener sanguis, &c. He is rich, but base born; he is noble,
but poor; a third hath means, but he wants health
peradventure, or wit to manage his estate; children vex one,
wife a second, &c. Nemo facile cum conditione sua concordat,
no man is pleased with his fortune, a pound of sorrow is
familiarly mixed with a dram of content, little or no joy,
little comfort, but evervwhere danger, contention, anxiety,
in all places: go where thou wilt, and thou shalt find
discontents, cares, woes, complaints, sickness, diseases,
incumbrances, exclamations: "If thou look into the market,
there (saith Chrysostom) is brawling and contention; if to
the court, there knavery and flattery, &c.; if to a private
man's house, there's cark and care, heaviness," &c. As he
said of old, Nil homine in terra spirat miserum magis alma?
No creature so miserable as man, so generally molested, "in
miseries of body, in miseries of mind, miseries of heart, in
miseries asleep, in miseries awake, in miseries wheresoever
he turns," as Bernard found, Nunquid tentatio est vita humana
super terram? A mere temptation is our life (Austin, confess.
lib. 10, cap. 28), catena perpetuorum malorum, et quis potest
molestias et difficultates pati? Who can endure the miseries
of it? "In prosperity we are insolent and intolerable,
dejected in adversity, in all fortunes foolish and
miserable." In adversity I wish for prosperity, and in
prosperity I am afraid of adversity. What mediocrity may be
found? Where is no temptation? What condition of life is
free? Wisdom hath labour annexed to it, glory envy; riches
and cares, children and incumbrances, pleasure and diseases,
rest and beggary, go together: as if a man were therefore
born (as the Platonists hold) to be punished in this life for
some precedent sins. Or that, as Pliny complains, "Nature may
be rather accounted a step-mother, than a mother unto us, all
things considered: no creature's life so brittle, so full of
fear, so mad, so furious; only man is plagued with envy,
discontent, griefs, covetousness, ambition, superstition."
Our whole life is an Irish sea, wherein there is nought to be
expected but tempestuous storms and troublesome waves, and
those infinite,

"Tantum malorum pelagus aspicio,
Ut non sit inde enatandi copia,"
(Euripides. "I perceive such an ocean of troubles before me,
that no means of escape remain.")

no halcyonian times, wherein a man can hold himself secure,
or agree with his present estate; but as Boethius infers,
"There is something in every one of us which before trial we
seek, and having tried abhor: we earnestly wish, and eagerly
covet, and are eftsoons weary of it." Thus between hope and
fear, suspicions, angers,  Inter spemque metumque, timores
inter et iras, betwixt falling in, falling out, &c., we
bangle away our best days, befool out our times, we lead a
contentious, discontent, tumultuous, melancholy, miserable
life; insomuch, that if we could foretell what was to come,
and it put to our choice, we should rather refuse than accept
of this painful life. In a word, the world itself is a maze,
a labyrinth of errors, a desert, a wilderness, a den of
thieves, cheaters, &c., full of filthy puddles, horrid rocks,
precipitiums, an ocean of adversity, an heavy yoke, wherein
infirmities and calamities overtake, and follow one another,
as the sea waves; and if we scape Scylla, we fall foul on
Charybdis, and so in perpetual fear, labour, anguish, we run
from one plague, one mischief, one burden to another, duram
servientes servitutem, and you may as soon separate weight
from lead, heat from fire, moistness from water, brightness
from the sun, as misery, discontent, care, calamity, danger,
from a man. Our towns and cities are but so many dwellings of
human misery. "In which grief and sorrow (as he right well
observes out of Solon) innumerable troubles, labours of
mortal men, and all manner of vices, are included, as in so
many pens." Our villages are like mole-hills, and men as so
many emmets, busy, busy still, going to and fro, in and out,
and crossing one another's projects, as the lines of several
sea-cards cut each other in a globe or map. "Now light and
merry, but (as one follows it) by-and-by sorrowful and heavy;
now hoping, then distrusting; now patient, to-morrow crying
out; now pale, then red; running, sitting, sweating,
trembling, halting," &c. Some few amongst the rest, or
perhaps one of a thousand, may be Pullus Jovis, in the
world's esteem, Gallinae filius albae, an happy and fortunate
man, ad invidiam felix, because rich, fair, well allied, in
honour and office; yet peradventure ask himself, and he will
say, that of all others, he is most miserable and unhappy. A
fair shoe, Hic soccus novus, elegans, as he said, sed nescis
ubi urat, but thou knowest not where it pincheth. It is not
another man's opinion can make me happy: but as Seneca well
hath it, "He is a miserable wretch that doth not account
himself happy; though he be sovereign lord of a world, he is
not happy, if he think himself not to be so; for what
availeth it what thine estate is, or seem to others, if thou
thyself dislike it?" A common humour it is of all men to
think well of other men's fortunes, and dislike their own:
Cui placet alterius, sua nimirum est odio sors; but qui fit
Maecenas, &c., how comes it to pass, what's the cause of it?
Many men are of such a perverse nature, they are well pleased
with nothing, (saith Theodoret) "neither with riches nor
poverty, they complain when they are well and when they are
sick, grumble at all fortunes, prosperity and adversity; they
are troubled in a cheap year, in a barren, plenty or not
plenty, nothing pleaseth them, war nor peace, with children,
nor without." This for the most part is the humour of us all,
to be discontent, miserable, and most unhappy, as we think at
least; and show me him that is not so, or that ever was
otherwise. Quintus Metellus his felicity is infinitely
admired amongst the Romans, insomuch that as Paterculus
mentioneth of him, you can scarce find of any nation, order,
age, sex, one for happiness to be compared unto him: he had,
in a word, Bona animi, corporis et fortunae, goods of mind,
body, and fortune, so had P. Mutianus, Crassus. Lampsaca,
that Lacedemonian lady was such another in Pliny's conceit, a
king's wife, a king's mother, a king's daughter: and all the
world esteemed as much of Polycrates of Samos. The Greeks
brag of their Socrates, Phocion, Aristides; the Psophidians
in particular of their Aglaus, Omni vita felix, ab omni
periculo immunis (which by the way Pausanias held
impossible); the Romans of their Cato, Curius, Fabricius, for
their composed fortunes, and retired estates, government of
passions, and contempt of the world: yet none of all these
were happy, or free from discontent, neither Metellus,
Crassus, nor Polycrates, for he died a violent death, and so
did Cato; and how much evil doth Lactantius and Theodoret
speak of Socrates, a weak man, and so of the rest. There is
no content in this life, but as he said, "All is vanity and
vexation of spirit;" lame and imperfect. Hadst thou Sampson's
hair, Milo's strength, Scanderbeg's arm, Solomon's wisdom,
Absalom's beauty, Croesus's wealth, Pasetis obulum, Caesar's
valour, Alexander's spirit, Tully's or Demosthenes'
eloquence, Gyges' ring, Perseus' Pegasus, and Gorgon's head,
Nestor's years to come, all this would not make thee
absolute, give thee content and true happiness in this life,
or so continue it. Even in the midst of all our mirth,
jollity, and laughter, is sorrow and grief; or if there be
true happiness amongst us, 'tis but for a time,

"Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne:"
"A handsome woman with a fish's tail."

a fair morning turns to a lowering afternoon. Brutus and
Cassius, once renowned, both eminently happy, yet you shall
scarce find two, (saith Paterculus) Quos fortuna maturius
destituerit, whom fortune sooner forsook. Hannibal, a
conqueror all his life, met with his match, and was subdued
at last, Occurrit forti, qui mage fortis erit. One is brought
in triumph, as Caesar into Rome, Alcibiades into Athens,
coronis aureis donatus, crowned, honoured, admired; by-and-by
his statues demolished, he hissed out, massacred, &c. Magnus
Gonsalva, that famous Spaniard, was of the prince and people
at first honoured, approved; forthwith confined and banished.
Admirandas actiones, graves plerumque sequuntur invidiae, et
acres calumniae: 'tis Polybius his observation, grievous
enmities, and bitter calumnies, commonly follow renowned
actions. One is born rich, dies a beggar; sound to-day, sick
tomorrow; now in most flourishing estate, fortunate and
happy, by-and-by deprived of his goods by foreign enemies,
robbed by thieves, spoiled, captivated, impoverished as they
of "Rabbah, put under iron saws, and under iron harrows, and
under axes of iron, and cast into the tile kiln,"

"Quid me felicem toties jactastis amici,
Qui cecidit, stabili non erat ille gradu."

He that erst marched like Xerxes with innumerable armies, as
rich as Croesus, now shifts for himself in a poor cock-boat,
is bound in iron chains, with Bajazet the Turk, and a
footstool with Aurelian, for a tyrannising conqueror to
trample on. So many casualties there are, that as Seneca said
of a city consumed with fire, Una dies interest inter maximam
civitatem et nullam, one day betwixt a great city and none:
so many grievances from outward accidents, and from
ourselves, our own indiscretion, inordinate appetite, one day
betwixt a man and no man, And which is worse, as if
discontents and miseries would not come fast enough upon us:
homo homini daemon, we maul, persecute, and study how to
sting, gall, and vex one another with mutual hatred, abuses,
injuries; preying upon and devouring as so many ravenous
birds; and as jugglers, panders, bawds, cozening one another;
or raging as wolves, tigers, and devils, we take a delight to
torment one another; men are evil, wicked, malicious,
treacherous, and naught, not loving one another, or loving
themselves, not hospitable, charitable, nor sociable as they
ought to be, but counterfeit, dissemblers, ambidexters, all
for their own ends, hard-hearted, merciless, pitiless, and to
benefit themselves, they care not what mischief they procure
to others. Praxinoe and Gorgo in the poet, when they had got
in to see those costly sights, they then cried bene est, and
would thrust out all the rest: when they are rich themselves,
in honour, preferred, full, and have even that they would,
they debar others of those pleasures which youth requires,
and they formerly have enjoyed. He sits at table in a soft
chair at ease, but he doth not remember in the meantime that
a tired waiter stands behind him, "an hungry fellow ministers
to him full, he is athirst that gives him drink (saith
Epictetus) and is silent whilst he speaks his pleasure:
pensive, sad, when he laughs." Pleno se proluit auro: he
feasts, revels, and profusely spends, hath variety of robes,
sweet music, ease, and all the pleasures the world can
afford, whilst many an hunger-starved poor creature pines in
the street, wants clothes to cover him, labours hard all day
long, runs, rides for a trifle, fights peradventure from sun
to sun, sick and ill, weary, full of pain and grief; is in
great distress and sorrow of heart. He loathes and scorns his
inferior, hates or emulates his equal, envies his superior,
insults over all such as are under him, as if he were of
another species, a demi-god, not subject to any fall, or
human infirmities. Generally they love not, are not beloved
again: they tire out others' bodies with continual labour,
they themselves living at ease, caring for none else, sibi
nati; and are so far many times from putting to their helping
hand, that they seek all means to depress, even most worthy
and well deserving, better than themselves, those whom they
are by the laws of nature bound to relieve and help, as much
as in them lies, they will let them caterwaul, starve, beg,
and hang, before they will any ways (though it be in their
power) assist or ease: unnatural are they for the most part,
so unregardful; so hard-hearted, so churlish, proud,
insolent, so dogged, of so bad a disposition. And being so
brutish, so devilishly bent one towards another, how is it
possible but that we should be discontent of all sides, full
of cares, woes, and miseries?

If this be not a sufficient proof of their discontent and
misery, examine every condition and calling apart. Kings,
princes, monarchs, and magistrates seem to be most happy, but
look into their estate, you shall find them to be most
encumbered with cares, in perpetual fear, agony, suspicion,
jealousy that as he said of a crown, if they knew but the
discontents that accompnay it, they would not stoop to take
it up. Quem mihi regem dabis, (saith Chrysostom) non curis
plenum? What king canst thou show me, not full of cares?
"Look not on his crown, but consider his afflictions; attend
not his number of servants, but multitude of crosses." Nihil
aliud potesas culminis, quam tempestas mentis, as Gregory
seconds him; sovereignty is a tempest of the soul: Sylla-
like, they have brave titles but terrible fits: splendorem
titulo, cruciatum animo, which made Demosthenes vow, si vel
ad tribunal, vel ad interitum duceretur: if to be a judge, or
to be condemned, were put to his choice, he would be
condemned. Rich men are in the same predicament; what their
pains are, stulta nesciunt, ipsi sentiunt: they feel, fools
perceive not, as I shall prove elsewhere, and their wealth is
brittle, like children's rattles: they come and go, there is
no certainty in them: those whom they elevate, they do as
suddenly depress, and leave in a vale of misery. The middle
sort of men are as so many asses to bear burdens; or if they
be free, and live at ease, they spend themselves, and consume
their bodies and fortunes with luxury and riot, contention,
emulation, &c. The poor I reserve for another place, and
their discontents.

For particular professions, I hold as of the rest, there's no
content or security in any; on what course will you pitch;
how resolve? to be a divine, 'tis contemptible in the world's
esteem; to be a lawyer, 'tis to be a wrangler; to be a
physician, pudet lotii, 'tis loathed; a philosopher, a
madman; an alchymist, a beggar; a poet, esurit, an hungry
jack; a musician, a player; a schoolmaster, a drudge; an
husbandman, an emmet; a merchant, his gains are uncertain; a
mechanician, base; a chirurgeon, fulsome; a tradesman, a
liar; a tailor, a thief; a serving-man, a slave; a soldier, a
butcher; a smith, or a metalman, the pot's never from's nose;
a courtier, a parasite, as he could find no tree in the wood
to hang himself; I can show no state of life to give content.
The like you may say of all ages; children live in a
perpetual slavery, still under that tyrannical government of
masters; young men, and of riper years, subject to labour,
and a thousand cares of the world, to treachery, falsehood
and cozenage,
"-- Incedit per ignes,
Suppositos cineri doloso,"
"-- you incautious tread
On fires, with faithless ashes overhead,"

old are full of aches in their bones, cramps and convulsions,
silicernia, dull of hearing, weak sighted, hoary, wrinkled,
harsh, so much altered as that they cannot know their own
face in a glass, a burthen to themselves and others, after 70
years, "all is sorrow" (as David hath it), they do not live
but linger. If they be sound, they fear diseases; if sick,
weary of their lives: Non est vivere sed valere, vita. One
complains of want, a second of servitude, another of a secret
or incurable disease; of some deformity of body, of some
loss, danger, death of friends, shipwreck, persecution,
imprisonment, disgrace, repulse, contumely, calumny, abuse,
injury, contempt, ingratitude, unkindness, scoffs, flouts,
unfortunate marriage, single life, too many children, no
children, false servants, unhappy children, barrenness,
banishment, oppression, frustrate hopes and ill success, &c.

"Talia de genere hoc adeo sunt multa, loquacem ut
Delassare valent Fabium.--"
"But every various instance to repeat
Would tire even Fabius of incessant prate."

Talking Fabius will be tired before he can tell half of them;
they are the subject of whole volumes, and shall (some of
them) be more opportunely dilated elsewhere. In the meantime
thus much I may say of them, that generally they crucify the
soul of man, attenuate our bodies, dry them, wither them,
shrivel them up like old apples, make them as so many
anatomies (ossa atque pellus est totus, ita curis macet),
they cause tempus foedum et squalidum, cumbersome days,
ingrataque tempora, slow, dull, and heavy times: make us
howl, roar, and tear our hairs, as sorrow did in Cebes'
table, and groan for the very anguish of our souls. Our
hearts fail us as David's did, Psal. xl. 12, "for innumerable
troubles that compassed him;" and we are ready to confess
with Hezekiah, Isaiah lviii. 17, "behold, for felicity I had
bitter grief;" to weep with Heraclitus, to curse the day of
our birth with Jeremy, xx. 14, and our stars with Job: to
hold that axiom of Silenus, "better never to have been born,
and the best next of all, to die quickly:" or if we must
live, to abandon the world, as Timon did; creep into caves
and holes, as our anchorites; cast all into the sea, as
Crates Thebanus; or as Theombrotus Ambrociato's 400 auditors,
precipitate ourselves to be rid of these miseries.



SUBSECT. XI.-- Concupiscible Appetite, as Desires, Ambition,
Causes.

THESE concupiscible and irascible appetites are as the two
twists of a rope, mutually mixed one with the other, and both
twining about the heart: both good, as Austin holds, l. 14,
c. 9, de civ. Dei, "if they be moderate; both pernicious if
they be exorbitant." This concupiscible appetite, howsoever
it may seem to carry with it a show of pleasure and delight,
and our concupiscences most part affect us with content and a
pleasing object, yet if they be in extremes, they rack and
wring us on the other side. A true saying it is, "Desire hath
no rest;" is infinite in itself endless; and as one calls it,
a perpetual rack, or horse-mill, according to Austin, still
going round as in a ring. They are not so continual, as
divers, felicius atomos denumerare possem, saith Bernard,
quam motus cordis; nunc haec, nunc illa cogito, you may as
well reckon up the motes in the sun as them. "It extends
itself to every thing," as Guianerius will have it, "that is
superfluously sought after:" or to any desire, as Fernelius
interprets it; be it in what kind soever, it tortures if
immoderate, and is (according to Plater and others) an
especial cause of melancholy. Multuosis concupiscenutiis
dilaniantur cogitationes meae. Austin confessed, that he was
torn a pieces with his manifold desires: and so doth Bernard
complain, "that he could not rest for them a minute of an
hour: this I would have, and that, and then I desire to be
such and such." 'Tis a hard matter therefore so confine them,
being they are so various and many, impossible to apprehend
all. I will only insist upon some few of the chief; and most
noxious in their kind, as that exorbitant appetite and desire
of honour, which we commonly call ambition; love of money,
which is covetousness, and that greedy desire of gain: self-
love, pride, and inordinate desire of vain-glory or applause,
love of study in excess; love of women (which will require a
just volume of itself), of the other I will briefly speak,
and in their order.

Ambition, a proud covetousness, or a dry thirst of honour, a
great torture of the mind, composed of envy, pride, and
covetousness, a gallant madness, one defines it a pleasant
poison, Ambrose, "a canker of the soul, an hidden plague:"
Bernard, "a secret poison, the father of livor, and mother of
hypocrisy, the moth of holiness, and cause of madness,
crucifying and disquieting all that it takes hold of." Seneca
calls it, rem solicitam, timidam, vanam, ventosam, a windy
thing, a vain, solicitous, and fearful thing. For commonly
they that, like Sysiphus, roll this restless stone of
ambition, are in a perpetual agony, still perplexed, semper
taciti, tristesque recedunt (Lucretius), doubtful, timorous,
suspicious, loath to offend in word or deed, still cogging
and collogueing, embracing, capping, cringing, applauding,
flattering, fleering, visiting, waiting at men's doors, with
all affability, counterfeit honesty and humility.

If that will not serve, if once this humour (as Cyprian
describes it) possess his thirsty soul, ambitionis salsugo
ubi bibulam animam possidet, by hook and by crook he will
obtain it, "and from his hole he will climb to all honours
and offices, if it be possible for him to get up, flattering
one, bribing another, he will leave no means unessay'd to win
all." It is a wonder to see how slavishly these kind of men
subject themselves, when they are about a suit, to every
inferior person; what pains they will take, run, ride, cast,
plot, countermine, protest and swear, vow, promise, what
labours undergo, early up, down late; how obsequious and
affable they are, how popular and courteous, how they grin
and fleer upon every man they meet; with what feasting and
inviting, how they spend themselves and their fortunes, in
seeking that many times, which they had much better be
without; as Cyneas the orator told Pyrrhus: with what waking
nights, painful hours, anxious thoughts, and bitterness of
mind, inter spemque metumque, distracted and tired, they
consume the interim of their time. There can be no greater
plague for the present. If they do obtain their suit, which
with such cost and solicitude they have sought, they are not
so freed, their anxiety is anew to begin, for they are never
satisfied, nihil aliud nisi imperium spirunt, their thoughts,
actions, endeavours are all for sovereignty like Lues Sforsia
that huffing duke of Milan, "a man of singular wisdom but
profound ambition, born to his own, and to the destruction of
Italy," though it be to their own ruin, and friends' undoing,
they will contend, they may not cease, but as a dog in a
wheel, a bird in a cage, or a squirrel in a chain, so Budaeus
compares them; they climb and climb still, with much labour,
but never make an end, never at the top. A knight would be a
baronet, and then a lord, and then a viscount, and then an
earl, &c.; a doctor, a dean, and then a bishop; from tribune
to praeetor; from bailiff to major; first this office, and
then that; as Pyrrhus in Plutarch, they will first have
Greece, then Africa, and then Asia, and swell with Aesop's
frog so long, till in the end they burst, or come down with
Sejanus, ad Gemonias scalas, and break their own necks; or as
Evangelus the piper in Lucian, that blew his pipe so long,
till he fell down dead. If he chance to miss, and have a
canvass, he is in a hell on the other side; so dejected, that
he is ready to hang himself, turn heretic, Turk or traitor in
an instant. Enraged against his enemies, he rails, swears,
fight; slanders, detracts, envies, murders: and for his own
part, si appetitum explere non potest, furore corripitur; if
he cannot satisfy his desire (as Bodine writes) he runs mad.
So that both ways, hit or miss, he is distracted so long as
his ambition lasts, he can look for no other but anxiety and
care, discontent and grief in the meantime, madness itself;
or violent death in the end. The event of this is common to
be seen in populous cities, or in princes' courts for a
courtier's life (as Budaeus describes it) "is a gallimaufry
of ambition, lust, fraud, imposture, dissimulation,
detraction, envy, pride; the court, a common conventicle of
flatterers, time-servers, politicians," &c.; or as Anthony
Perez will, "the suburbs of hell itself." If you will see
such discontented persons, there you shall likely find them.
And which he observed of the markets of old Rome,

Qui perjurum convenire vult hominum, mitto in Comitium;
Qui mendacem et gloriosum, apud Cluasinae sacrum;
Dites, damnosos marisos, sub basilica quaerito," &c.

Perjured knaves, knights of the post, liars, crackers, bad
husbands, &c. keep their several stations; they do still, and
always did in every commonwealth.



SUBSECT. XII.-- F??a?????a [Philargyria], Covetousness, a
Cause.


PLUTARCH, in his book whether the diseases of the body be
more grievous than those of the soul, is of opinion, "if you
will examine all the causes of our miseries in this life, you
shall find them most part to have had their beginning from
stubborn anger, that furious desire of contention, or some
unjust or immoderate affection, as covetousness," &c. "From
whence are wars and contentions amongst you?" St. James asks:
I will add usury, fraud, rapine, simony, oppression, lying,
swearing, bearing false witness, &c. are they not from this
fountain of covetousness, that greediness in getting,
tenacity in keeping, sordity in spending; that they are so
wicked, "unjust against God, their neighbour, themselves;"
all comes hence. "The desire of money is the root of all
evil, and they that lust after it, pierce themselves through
with many sorrows," 1 Tim. vi. 10. Hippocrates therefore in
his Epistle to Crateva, an herbalist, gives him this good
counsel, that if it were possible, "amongst other herbs, he
should cut up that weed of covetousness by the roots, that
there be no remainder left, and then know this for a
certainty, that together with their bodies, thou mayst
quickly cure all the diseases of their minds." For it is
indeed the pattern, image, epitome of all melancholy, the
fountain of many miseries, much discontented care and woe;
this "inordinate or immoderate desire of gain, to get or keep
money," as Bonaventure defines it: or, as Austin describes
it, a madness of the soul, Gregory, a torture; Chrysostom, an
insatiable drunkennese; Cyprian, blindness, speciosum
supplicium, a plague subverting kingdoms, families, an
incurable disease; Budaeus, an ill habit, "yielding to no
remedies:" neither, Aesculapius nor Plutus can cure them: a
continual plague, saith Solomon, and vexation of spirit,
another hell. I know there be some of opinion, that covetous
men are happy, and worldly-wise, that there is more pleasure
in getting of wealth than in spending, and no delight in the
world like unto it. 'Twas Bias' problem of old, "With what
art thou not weary I with getting money. What is more
delectable? to gain." What is it, trow you, that makes a poor
man labour all his lifetime, carry such great burdens, fare
so hardly, macerate himself; and endure so much misery,
undergo such base offices with so great patience, to rise up
early, and lie down late, if there were not an extraordinary
delight in getting and keeping of money? What makes a
merchant that hath no need, satis superque domi, to range all
over the world, through all those intemperate Zones of heat
and cold; voluntarily to venture his life, and be content
with such miserable famine, nasty usage, in a stinking ship;
if there were not a pleasure and hope to get money, which
doth season the rest, and mitigate his indefatigable pains?
What makes them go into the bowels of the earth, an hundred
fathom deep, endangering their dearest lives, enduring damps
and filthy smells, when they have enough already, if they
could be content, and no such cause to labour, but an
extraordinary delight they take in riches. This may seem
plausible at first show, a popular and strong argument; but
let him that so thinks, consider better of it, and he shall
soon perceive, that it is far otherwise than he supposeth; it
may be haply pleasing at the first, as most part all
melancholy is. For such men likely have some lucida
intervalla, pleasant symptoms intermixed; but you must note
that of Chrysostom, "Tis one thing to be rich, another to be
covetous:" generally they are all fools, dizzards, mad-men,
miserable wretches, living beside themselves, sine arte
fruendi, in perpetual slavery, fear, suspicion, sorrow, and
discontent, plus aloes quam mellis habent; and are indeed,
"rather possessed by their money, than possessors:" as
Cyprian hath it, mancipati pecuniis; bound prentice to their
goods, as Pliny; or as Chrysostom, servi divitiarum, slaves
and drudges to their substance; and we may conclude of them
all, as Valerius doth of Ptolomaeus king of Cyprus, "He was
in title a king of that island, but in his mind, a miserable
drudge of money:"

"-- potiore metallis
Libertate carens --"

wanting his liberty, which is better than gold. Damasippus
the Stoic, in Horace, proves that all mortal men dote by
fits, some one way, some another, but that covetous men "are
madder than the rest; and he that shall truly look into their
estates, and examine their symptoms, shall find no better of
them, but that they are all fools, as Nabal was, Re et nomine
(1. Reg. 25). For what greater folly can there be, or
madness, than to macerate himself when he need not? and when,
as Cyprian notes, "he may be freed from his burden, and eased
of his pains, will go on still, his wealth increasing, when
he hath enough, to get more, to live besides himself," to
starve his genius, keep back from his wife and children,
neither letting them nor other friends use or enjoy that
which is theirs by right, and which they much need perhaps;
like a hog, or dog in the manger, he doth only keep it,
because it shall do nobody else good, hurting himself and
others: and for a little momentary pelf damn his own soul!
They are commonly sad and tetric by nature, as Ahab's spirit
was, because he could not get Naboth's vineyard, (3. Reg.
21.) and if he lay out his money at any time, though it be to
necessary uses, to his own children's good, he brawls and
scolds, his heart is heavy, much disquieted he is, and loath
to part from it: Miser abstinet et timet uti, Hor. He is of a
wearish, dry, pale constitution, and cannot sleep for cares
and worldly business; his riches, saith Solomon, will not let
him sleep, and unnecessary business which he heapeth on
himself; or if he do sleep, 'tis a very unquiet, interrupt,
unpleasing sleep: with his bags in his arms,

"--- congestis undique saccis
Indormit inhians,---"

And though he be at a banquet, or at some merry feast, "he
sighs for grief of heart (as Cyprian hath it) and cannot
sleep though it be upon a down bed; his wearish body takes no
rest, troubled in his abundance, and sorrowful plenty,
unhappy for the present, and more unhappy in the life to
come." Basil. He is a perpetual drudge, restless in his
thoughts, and never satisfied, a slave, a wretch, a dust-
worm, semper quod idolo suo immolet, sedulus observat, Cypr.
prolog. ad sermon. still seeking what sacrifice he may offer
to his golden god, per fas et nefas, he cares not how, his
trouble is endless, crescunt divinae, tamen curtae nescio
quid semper abest rei: his wealth increaseth, and the more he
hath, the more he wants: like Pharaoh's lean kine, which
devoured the fat, and were not satisfied. Austin therefore
defines covetousness, quarumlibet rerum inhonestam et
insatiabilem cupiditatem, a dishonest and insatiable desire
of gain; and in one of his epistles compares it to hell;
"which devours all, and yet never hath enough, a bottomless
pit," an endless misery; in quem scopulum avaritiae
cadaverosi senes ut plurimum impingunt, and that which is
their greatest corrosive, they are in continual suspicion,
fear, and distrust. He thinks his own wife and children are
so many thieves, and go about to cozen him, his servants are
all false:

"Rem suam perlisse, seque eradicarier,
Et divium atque hominum clamat continuo fidem
De suo tigillo fumus si qua exit foras."
"If his doors creak, then out he cries anon,
His goods are gone, and he is quite undone."

Timidus Plutus, an old proverb, As fearful as Plutus; so doth
Aristophanes and Lucian bring him in fearful still, pale,
anxious, suspicious, and trusting no man, "They are afraid of
tempests for their corn; they are afraid of their friends
lest they should ask something of them, beg or borrow; they
are afraid of their enemies lest they hurt them, thieves lest
they rob them; they are afraid of war and afraid of peace,
afraid of rich and afraid of poor; afraid of all." Last of
all, they are afraid of want, that they shall die beggars,
which makes them lay up still, and dare not use that they
have: what if a dear year come, or dearth, or some loss? and
were it not that they are loath to lay out money on a rope,
they would be hanged forthwith, and sometimes die to save
charges, and make away themselves, if their corn and cattle
miscarry; though they have abundance left, as Agellius notes.
Valerius makes mention of one that in a famine sold a mouse
for 200 pence, and famished himself: such are their cares,
griefs and perpetual fears. These symptoms are elegantly
expressed by Theophrastus in his character of a covetous man;
"lying in bed, he asked his wife whether she shut the trunks
and chests fast, the carcase be sealed, and whether the hall
door be bolted; and though she say all is well, he riseth out
of his bed in his shirt, barefoot and barelegged, to see
whether it be so, with a dark lantern searching every corner,
scarce sleeping a wink all night." Lucian in that pleasant
and witty dialogue called Gallas, brings in Mycillus the
cobbler disputing with his cock, sometimes Pythagoras; where
after much speech pro and con to prove the happiness of a
mean estate, and discontents of a rich man, Pythagoras' cock
in the end, to illustrate by examples that which he had said,
brings him to Gryphon the usurer's house at midnight, and
after that to Eucrates; whom they found both awake, casting
up their accounts, and telling of their money, lean, dry,
pale and anxious, still suspecting lest somebody should make
a hole through the wall, and so get in; or if a rat or mouse
did but stir, starting upon a sudden, and running to the door
to see whether all were fast. Plautus, in his Aulularia,
makes old Euclio commanding Staphyla his wife to shut the
doors fast, and the fire to be put out, lest any body should
make that an errand to come to his house: when he washed his
hands, he was loath to fling away the foul water, complaining
that he was undone, because the smoke got out of his roof.
And as he went from home, seeing a crow scratch upon the
muck-hill, returned in all haste, taking it for malum omen,
an ill sign, his money was digged up; with many such. He that
will but observe their actions, shall find these and many
such passages not feigned for sport, but really performed,
verified indeed by such covetous and miserable wretches, and
that it is,

"-- manifesta phrenesis
Ut locuples moriaris egenti vivrere fato."

A mere madness, to live like a wretch, and die rich.


SUBSECT. XIII.-- Love of Gaming, &c., and pleasures
immoderate, Causes.


IT is a wonder to see, how many poor, distressed, miserable
wretches, one shall meet almost in every path and street,
begging for an alms, that have been well descended, and
sometimes in flourishing estate, now ragged, tattered, and
ready to be starved, lingering out a painful life, in
discontent and grief of body and mind, and all through
immoderate lust, gaming, pleasure and riot. 'Tis the common
end of all sensual epicures and brutish prodigals, that are
stupified and carried away headlong with their several
pleasures and lusts. Cebes in his table, S. Ambrose in his
second book of Abel and Cain, and amongst the rest Lucian in
his tract de Mercede conductis, hath excellent well
deciphered such men's proceedings in his picture of
Opulentia, whom he feigns to dwell on the top of a high
mount, much sought after by many suitors; at their first
coming they are generally entertained by pleasure and
dalliance, and have all the content that possibly may be
given, so long as their money lasts: but when their means
fail, they are contemptibly thrust out at a back door,
headlong, and there left to shame, reproach, despair. And he
at first that had so many attendants, parasites, and
followers, young and lusty, richly arrayed, and all the
dainty fare that might be had, with all kind of welcome and
good respect, is now upon a sudden stript of all, pale,
naked, old, diseased and forsaken, cursing his stars, and
ready to strangle himself; having no other company but
repentance, sorrow, grief, derision, beggary and contempt,
which are his daily attendants to his life's end. As the
prodigal son had exquisite music, merry company, dainty fare
at first; but a sorrowful reckoning in the end; so have all
such vain delights and their followers. Tristes voluptatum
exitus, et quisquis voluptatum suarum reminisci volet,
intelliget, as bitter as gall and wormwood is their last;
grief of mind, madness itself. The ordinary rocks upon which
such men do impinge and precipitate themselves, are cards,
dice, hawks and hounds, Insanum venandi studium, one calls
it, insanae substractiones: their mad structures, disports,
plays &c., when they are unseasonably used, imprudently 
handled, and beyond their fortunes. Some men are consumed by
mad fantastical buildings, by making galleries, cloisters,
terraces, walks, orchards, gardens, pools, rillets, bowers,
and such like places of pleasure; Inutiles domos, Xenophon
calls them, which howsoever they be delightsome things in
themselves, and acceptable to all beholders, an ornament and
befitting some great men; yet unprofitable to others, and the
sole overthrow of their estates. Forestus in his observations
hath an example of such a one that became melancholy upon the
like occasion, having consumed his substance in an
unprofitable building, which would afterward yield him no
advantage. Others, I say, are overthrown by those mad sports
of hawking and hunting; honest recreations, and fit for some
great men, but not for every base interior person; whilst
they will maintain their falconers, dogs, and hunting nags,
their wealth, saith Salimutze, "runs away with hounds, and
their fortunes fly away with hawks." They persecute beasts so
long, till in the end they themselves degenerate into beasts,
as Agrippa taxeth them, Actaeon-like, for as he was eaten to
death by his own dogs, so do they devour themselves and their
patrimonies, in such idle and unnecessary disports,
neglecting in the mean time their more necessary business,
and to follow their vocations. Over-mad too sometimes are our
great men in delighting, and doting too much on it. "When
they drive poor husbandmen from their tillage," as
Sarisburiensis objects, Polycrat. l. 1. c. 4. "fling down
country farms, and whole towns, to make parks, and forests,
starving men to feed beasts, and punishing in the mean time
such a man that shall molest their game, more severely than
him that is otherwise a common hacker, or a notorious thief."
But great men are some ways to be excused, the meaner sort
have no evasion why they should not be counted mad. Poggius
the Florentine tells a merry story to this purpose,
condemning the folly and impertinent business of such kind of
persons. A physician of Milan, saith he, that cured mad men,
had a pit of water in his house, in which he kept his
patients, some up to their knees, some to the girdle, some to
the chin, pro mode insaniae, as they were more or less
affected. One of them by chance, that was well recovered,
stood in the door, and seeing a gallant ride by with a hawk
on his fist, well mounted, with his spaniels after him, would
needs know to what use all this preparation served; he made
answer to kill certain fowls; the patient demanded again,
what his fowl might be worth which he killed in a year; he
replied 5 or 10 crowns; and when he urged him farther what
his dogs, horse, and hawks stood him in, he told him 400
crowns; with that the patient bade him be gone, as he loved
his life and welfare, for if our master come and find thee
here, he will put thee in the pit amongst mad men up to the
chin: taxing the madness and fully of such vain men that
spend themselves in those idle sports, neglecting their
business and necessary affairs. Leo decimus, that hunting
pope, is much discommended by Jovius in his life, for his
immoderate desire of hawking and hunting, in so much that (as
he saith) he would sometimes live about Ostia weeks and
months together, leave suitors unrespected, bulls and pardons
unsigned, to his own prejudice, and many private men's loss.
"And if he had been by chance crossed in his sport, or his
game not so good, he was so impatient, that he would revile
and miscall many times men of great worth with most bitter
taunts, look so sour, be so angry and waspish, so grieved and
molested, that it is incredible to relate it." But if he had
good sport, and been well pleased,on the other side,
incredibili munificentia, with unspeakable bounty and
munificence he would reward all his fellow hunters, and deny
nothing to any suitor when he was in that mood. To say truth,
'tis the common humour of all gamesters, as Galataeus
observes, if they win, no men living are so jovial and merry,
but if they lose, though it be but a trifle, two or three
games at tables, or a dealing at cards for twopence a game,
they are so choleric and testy that no man may speak with
them, and break many times into violent passions, oaths,
imprecations, and unbeseeming speeches, little differing from
mad men for the time. Generally of all gamesters and gaming,
if it be excessive, thus much we may conclude, that whether
they win or lose for the present, their winnings are not
Munera fortunae, sed insidiae, as that wise Seneca
determines, not fortune's gifts, but baits, the common
catastrophe is beggary, Ut pestis vitam, sic adimit alea
pecuniam, as the plague takes away life, doth gaming goods,
for omnes nudi, inopes et egeni;

"Alea Scylla vorax, species certissima furti,
Non contenta bonis animum quoque perfida mergit,
Foeda, furax, infamis, iners, furiosa, ruina."

For a little pleasure they take, and some small gains and
gettings now and then, their wives and children are wringed
in the mean time, and they themselves with loss of body and
soul rue it in the end. I will say nothing of those
prodigious prodigals, perdendae pecuniae genitos, as he taxed
Anthony, Qui patrimonium sine ulla fori calumnia amittunt,
saith Cyprian, and mad Sybaritical spendthrifts, Quique una
comedunt patrimonia coena; that eat up all at a breakfast, at
a supper, or amongst bawds, parasites, and players, consume
themselves in an instant, as if they had flung it into the
Tiber with great wagers, vain and idle expenses, &c., not
themselves only, but even all their friends, as a man
desperately swimming drowns him that comes to help him, by
suretiship and borrowing they will willingly undo all their
associates and allies. Irati pecuniis, as he saith, angry
with their money: "what with a wanton eye, a liquorish
tongue, and a gamesome hand, when they have indiscreetly
impoverished themselves, mortgaged their wits together with
their lands, and entombed their ancestors' fair possessions
in their bowels, they may lead the rest of their days in
prison, as many times they do; they repent at leisure; and
when all is gone begin to be thrifty: but Sera est in fundo
parsimonia, 'tis then too late to look about; their end is
misery, sorrow, shame, and discontent. And well they deserve
to be infamous and discontent. Catamidiari in Amphitheatro,
as Adrian the emperor's edict they were of old, decoctores
bonorurn suorum, so he calls them, prodigal fools, to be
publicly shamed, and hissed out of all societies, rather than
to be pitied or relieved. The Tuscans and Boëtians brought
their bankrupts into the market place in a bier with an empty
purse carried before them, all the boys following, where they
sat all day circumstante plebe, to be infamous and
ridiculous. At Patina in Italy they have a stone called the
stone of turpitude, near the senate house, where
spendthrifts, and such as disclaim non-payment of debts, do
sit with their hinder parts bare, that by that note of
disgrace, others may be terrified from all such vain expense,
or borrowing more than they can tell how to pay. The
civilians of old set guardians over such brain-sick
prodigals, as they did over madmen, to moderate their
expenses, that they should not so loosely consume their
fortunes, to the utter undoing of their families.

I may not here omit those two main plagues, and common
dotages of human kind, wine and women, which have infatuated
and besotted myriads of people: they go commonly together.

"Qui vino indulget, quemque alea decoquit, ille
In venerem putret --"
(Persius, Sat. 5. "One indulges in wine, another the die
consumes, a third is decomposed by venery")
To whom is sorrow, saith Solomon Pro. xxiii. 29. to whom is
woe, but to such a one as loves drink? it causeth torture
(vino tortus et ira), and bitterness of mind, Sirac. 31. 21.
Vinum furoris, Jeremy calls it, 15. cap. wine of madness, as
well he may, for insanire facit sanos, it makes sound men
sick and sad, and wise men mad, to say and do they know not
what. Accidit hodie terribilis casus (saith Austin), hear a
miserable accident; Cyrillus' son this day in his drink,
Matrem praegnantem nequiter oppressit, sororem violare
voluit, patrem occidit fere, et duas alias sorores ad mortem
vulneravit, would have violated his sister, killed his
father, &c. A true saying it was of him, Vino dari laetitiam
et dolorem, drink causeth mirth, and drink causeth sorrow,
drink "causeth poverty and want," (Prov. xxi.) shame and
disgrace. Multi ignobiles evasere ob vini potum, et (Austin)
amissis honoribus profugi aberrarunt: many men have made
shipwreck of their fortunes, and go like rogues and beggars,
having turned all their substance into aurum potabile, that
otherwise might have lived in good worship and happy estate,
and for a few hours' pleasure, for their Hilary term's but
short, or free madness, as Seneca calls it, purchase unto
themselves eternal tediousness and trouble.

That other madness is on women, Apostatare facit cor, saith
the wise man, Atque homini cerebrum minuit. Pleasant at first
she is, like Dioscorides' Rhododaphne, that fair plant to the
eye, but poison to the taste, the rest as bitter as wormwood
in the end (Prov. v. 4.) and sharp as a two-edged sword.
(vii. 27.) "Her house is the way to hell, and goes down to
the chambers of death." What more sorrowful can be said? they
are miserable in this life, mad, beasts, led like "oxen to
the slaughter:" and that which is worse, whoremasters and
drunkards shall be judged, amittunt gratiam, saith Austin,
perdunt gloriam, incurrunt damnationem aeternam. They lose
grace and glory;

"-- brevis illa voluptas
Abrogat aeternum coeli decus --"

they gain hell and eternal damnation.



SUBSECT. XIV.-- Philautia, or Self-love, Vain-glory, Praise,
Honour, Immoderate Applause, Pride, over-much Joy, &c.,
Causes.


SELF-LOVE, pride, and vain-glory, caecus amor sui, which
Chrysostom calls one of the devil's three great nets;
Bernard, "an arrow which pierceth the soul through, and slays
it; a sly, insensible enemy, not perceived," are main causes.
Where neither anger, lust, covetousness, fear, sorrow, &c.,
nor any other perturbation can lay hold; this will slily and
insensibly pervert us, Quem non gula vincit, Philautia
superavit, (saith Cyprian) whom surfeiting could not
overtake, self-love hath overcome. "He hath scorned all
money, bribes, gifts, upright otherwise and sincere, hath
inserted himself to no fond imagination, and sustained all
those tyrannical concupiscences of the body, hath lost all
his honour, captivated by vain-glory." Chrysostom. sup. Io.
Tu sola animum mentemque peruris, gloria. A great assault and
cause of our present malady, although we do most part
neglect, take no notice of it, yet this is a violent batterer
of our souls, causeth melancholy and dotage. This pleasing
humour; this soft and whispering popular air, Amabilis
insania; this delectable frenzy, most irrefragable passion,
Mentis gratissimus error, this acceptable disease, which so
sweetly sets upon us, ravisheth our senses, lulls our souls
asleep, puffs up our hearts as so many bladders, and that
without all feeling, insomuch as "those that are misaffected
with it, never so much as once perceive it, or think of any
cure." We commonly love him best in this malady, that doth us
most harm, and are very willing to be hurt; adulationibus
nostris libenter favemus (saith Jerome) we love him, we love
him for it: O Bonciari, suave suave fuit a te tali haec
tribui; 'Twas sweet to hear it. And as Pliny doth ingenuously
confess to his dear friend Augurinus, "all thy writings are
most acceptable, but those especially that speak of us."
Again, a little after to Maximus, "I cannot express how
pleasing it is to me to hear myself commended." Though we
smile to ourselves, at least ironically, when parasites
bedaub us with false encomiums, as many princes cannot choose
but do, Quum tale quid nihil intra se repererint, when they
know they come as far short, as a mouse to an elephant, of
any such virtues; yet it doth us good. Though we seem many
times to be angry, "and blush at our own praises, yet our
souls inwardly rejoice, it puffs us up;" 'tis fallax
suavitas, blandus daemon, "makes us swell beyond our bounds,
and forget ourselves." Her two daughters are lightness of
mind, immoderate joy and pride, not excluding those other
concomitant vices, which Iodocus Lorichius reckons up;
bragging, hypocrisy, peevishness, and curiosity.

Now the common cause of this mischief, ariseth from ourselves
or others, we are active and passive. It proceeds inwardly
from ourselves, as we are active causes, from an overweening
conceit we have of our good parts, own worth, (which indeed
is no worth) our bounty, favour, grace, valour, strength,
wealth, patience, meekness, hospitality, beauty, temperance,
gentry, knowledge, wit, science, art, learning, our excellent
gifts and fortunes, for which, Narcissus-like, we admire,
flatter, and applaud ourselves, and think all the world
esteems so of us; and as deformed women easily believe those
that tell them they be fair, we are too credulous of our own
good parts and praises, too well persuaded of ourselves. We
brag and venditate our own works, and scorn all others in
respect of us; Inflati scientia (saith Paul), our wisdom, our
learning, all our geese are swans, and we as basely esteem
and vilify other men's, as we do over-highly prize and value
our own. We will not suffer them to be in secundis, no, not
in tertiis; what, Mecum confertur Ulysses? they are Mures,
Muscae, culices prae se, nits and flies compared to his
inexorable and supercilious, eminent and arrogant worship:
though indeed they be far before him. Only wise, only rich,
only fortunate, valorous, and fair, puffed up with this
tympany of self-conceit; as that proud Pharisee, they are not
(as they suppose) "like other men," of a purer and more
precious metal: Soli rei gerendi sunt efficaces, which that
wise Periander held of such: meditantur omne qui prius
negotium &c. Novi quendam (saith Erasmus) I knew one so
arrogant that he thought himself inferior to no man living,
like Callisthenes the philosopher, that neither held
Alexander's acts, or any other subject worthy of his pen,
such was his insolency; or Seleucus king of Syria, who
thought none fit to contend with him but the Romans. Eos
solos dignos ratus quibuscum de iiperio certaret. That which
Tully writ to Atticus long since, is still in force, "There
was never yet true poet nor orator, that thought any other
better than himself." And such for the most part are your
princes, potentates, great philosophers, historiographers,
authors of sects or heresies, and all our great scholars, as
Hierom defines; "a natural philosopher is a glorious
creature, and a very slave of rumour, fame, and popular
opinion," and though they write de contemptu gloriae, yet as
he observes, they will put their names to their books. Vobis
et famae me semper dedi, saith Trebellius Pollio, I have
wholly consecrated myself to you and fame. "'Tis all my
desire, night and day, 'tis all my study to raise my name."
Proud Pliny seconds him; Quanquam O! &c. and that vain-
glorious orator, is not ashamed to confess in an Epistle of
his to Marcus Lecceius Ardeo incredibili cupiditate, &c. "I
burn with an lucreclible desire to have my name registered in
thy book." Out of this fountain proceed all those cracks and
brags, -- speramus carmina fingi Posse linenda cedro, et leni
servanda cupresso -- Non usitata nec tenui ferar penna -- nec
in terra morabur longius. Nil parvum aut humili modo, nil
mortale loquor. Dicar qua violens obstrepit Ausidas.-- Exegi
monumentum aere perennius. Jamque opus exegi, quod nec Jovis
ira, nec ignis, &c., cum venit ille dies, &c., parte tamen
meliore mei semper alta perennis astra ferar, nomenque erit
indelebile nostrum. (This of Ovid I have paraphrased in
English.)

"And when I am dead and gone
My corpse laid under a stone
My fame shall yet survive
And I shall be alive
In these my works for ever,
My glory shall persever," &c.

And that of Ennius,

"Nemo me lachrymis decoret, neque funera fictu
Faxit, cur? volito docta per ora virum."

"Let none shed tears over me, or adorn my bier with sorrow --
because I am eternally in the mouths of men." With many such
proud strains, and foolish flashes too common with writers.
Not so much as Democharis on the  Topics, but he will be
immortal. Typotius de fama, shall be famous, and well he
deserves, because he writ of fame; and every trivial poet
must be renowned, "-- Plausuque petit clarescere vulgi." "He
seeks the applause of the public." This puffing humour it is,
that hath produced so many great tomes, built such famous
monuments, strong castles, and Mausolean tombs, to have their
acts eternised, "Digito monstrari, et dicier hic est;" "to be
pointed at with the finger, and to have it said, 'there he
goes,'" to see their names inscribed, as Phryne on the walls
of Thebes, Phryne fecit; this causeth so many bloody battles,
"et noctes cogit vigilare serenas;" "and induces us to watch
during calm nights." Long journeys, "Magnum iter intendo, sed
dat mihi gloria vires," "I contemplate a monstrous journey,
but the love of glory strengthens me for it," gaining honour,
a little applause, pride, self-love, vain-glory. This is it
which makes them take such pains, and break out into those
ridiculous strains, this high conceit of themselves to scorn
all others; ridiculo fastu et intolerando contemptu; as
Palaemon the grammarian contemned Varro, secum et natas et
morituras literas jactans, and brings them to that height of
insolency, that they cannot endure to be contradicted, or
"hear of any thing but their own commendation," which Hierom
notes of such kind of men. And as Austin well seconds him,
"'tis their sole study day and night to be commended and
applauded." When as indeed, in all wise men's judgments,
quibus cor sapit, they are "mad, empty vessels, funges,
beside themselves,  derided, et ut Camelus in proverbio
quaerens cornua, etiam quas habebat aures amisit, ("As
Camelus in the novel who lost his ears while he was looking
for a pair of horns") their works are toys, as an almanac out
of date, authoris pereunt garrulitate sui, they seek fame and
immortality, but reap dishonour and infamy, they are a common
obloquy, insensati, and come far short of that which they
suppose or expect. O puer ut sis vitalis metuo.

"-- How much I dread
Thy days are short, some lord shall strike thee dead"

Of so many myriads of poets, rhetoricians, philosophers,
sophisters,as Eusebius well observes, which have written in
former ages, scarce one of a thousand's works remains, nomina
et libri simul cum corporibus interierunt, their books and
bodies are perished together. It is not as they vainly think,
they shall surely be admired and immortal, as one told Philip
of Macedon insultingly, after a victory, that his shadow was
no longer than before, we may say to them,

"Nos demiramur, sed non cum deside vulgo,
Sed velut Harpyas, Gorgonas, et Furias."
"We marvel too, not as the vulgar we,
But as we Gorgons, Harpies, or Furies see."


Or if we do applaud, honour and admire, quota pars, how small
a part, in respect of the whole world, never so much as hears
our names, how few take notice of us, how slender a tract, as
scant as Alcibiades's land in a map! And yet every man must
and will be immortal, as he hopes, and extend his fame to our
antipodes, when as half no not a quarter of his own province
or city, neither knows nor hears of him: but say they did,
what's a city to a kingdom, a kingdom to Europe, Europe to
the world, the world itself that must have an end, if
compared to the least visible star in the firmament, eighteen
times bigger than it? and then if those stars be infinite,
and every star there be a sun, as some will, and as this sun
of ours hath his planets about him, all inhabited, what
proportion bear we to them, and where's our glory? Orbem
terrarum victor Romanus habebat, as he cracked in Petronius,
all the world was under Augustus: and so in Constantine's
time, Eusebius brags he governed all the world, universum
mundum praeclare admodum administravit,-- et omnis orbis
gentes Imperatori subjecti: so of Alexander it is given out,
the four monarchies, &c., when as neither Greeks nor Romans
ever had the fifteenth partof the now known world, nor half
of that which was then described. What braggadocioes are they
and we then? quam brevis hic de nobis sermo, as he said,
pudebit aucti nominis, how short a time, how little a while
doth this fame of ours continue? Every private province,
every small territory and city, when we have all done, will
yield as generous spirits, as brave examples in all respects,
as famous as ourselves, Cadwallader in Wales, Rollo in
Normandy, Robin Hood and Little John, are as much renowned in
Sherwood, as Caesar in Rome, Alexander in Greece, or his
Hephestion, Omnis aetas omnisque populus in exemplum et
admirationem veniet, every town, city, book, is full of brave
soldiers, senators, scholars; and though Bracydas was a
worthy captain, a good man, and as they thought, not to be
matched in Lacedaemon, yet as his mother truly said, plures
habet Sparta Bracyda meliores, Sparta had many better men
than ever he was; and howsoever thou admirest thyself thy
friend, many an obscure fellow the world never took notice
of, had he been in place or action, would have done much
better than he or he, or thou thyself.

Another kind of mad men there is opposite to these, that are
insensibly mad, and know not of it, such as contemn all
praise and glory, think themselves most free, when as indeed
they are most mad: calcant sed alio fastu: a company of
cynics, such as are monks, hermits, anchorites, that contemn
the world, contemn themselves, contemn all titles, honours,
offices: and yet in that contempt are more proud than any man
living whatsoever. They are proud in humility, proud in that
they are not proud, saepe homo de vanae gloriae contemptu,
vanius gloriatur, as Austin hath it, confess. lib. 10. cap.
38, like Diogenes, intus gloriantur, they brag inwardly, and
feed themselves fat with a self-conceit of sanctity, which is
no better than hypocrisy. They go in sheep's russet, many
great men that might maintain themselves in cloth of gold,
and seem to be dejected, humble by their outward carriage,
when as inwardly they are swoln full of pride, arrogancy, and
self-conceit. And therefore Seneca adviseth his friend
Lucilius, "in his attire and gesture, outward actions,
especially to avoid all such things as are more notable in
themselves: as a rugged attire, hirsute head, horrid beard,
contempt of money, coarse lodging, and whatsoever leads to
fame that opposite way."

All this madness yet proceeds from ourselves, the main engine
which batters us is from others, we are merely passive in 
this business: from a company of parasites and flatterers,
that with immoderate praise, and bombast epithets, glozing
titles, false eulogiums, so bedaub and applaud, gild over
many a silly and undeserving man, that they clap him quite
out of his wits. Res imprimis violenta est, as Hierom notes,
this common applause is a most violent thing, laudum
placenta, a drum, fife, and trumpet cannot so animate; that
fattens men, erects and dejects them in an instant. Palma
negata macrum, donata reducit opimum. It makes them fat and
lean, as frost doth conies. "And who is that mortal man that
can so contain himself, that if he be immoderately commended
and applauded, will not be moved?" Let him be what he will,
those parasites will overturn him: if he be a king, he is one
of the nine worthies, more than a man, a god forthwith, --
edictum Domini Deique nostri: and they will sacrifice unto
him,

"-- divinos si tu patiaris honores,
Ultro ipsi dabimus meritasque sacrabimus aras.
(Stroza. "If you will accept divine honours, we will
willingly erect and consecrate altars to you.")

If he be a soldier, then Themistocles, Epaminondas, Hector,
Achilles, duo fulmina belli, triumviri terrarum, &c., and the
valour of both Scipios is too little for him, he is
invictissimus, serenissimus, multis trophaeis ornatissimus,
naturae dominus, although he be lepus galeatus, indeed a very
coward, a milksop, and as he said of Xerxes, postremus in
pugna, primus in fuga, and such a one as never durst look his
enemy in the face. If he be a big man, then is he a Samson,
another Hercules; if he pronounce a speech, another Tully or
Demosthenes: as of Herod in the Acts, "the voice of God and
not of man;" if he can make a verse, Homer, Virgil, &c. And
then my silly weak patient takes all these eulogiums to
himself; if he be a scholar so commended for his much
reading, excellent style, method, &c., he will eviscerate
himself like a spider, study to death, Laudatas ostendit avis
Junonia pennas, peacock-like he will display all his
feathers. If he be a soldier, and so applauded, his valour
extolled, though it be impar congressus, as that of Troilus,
and Achilles, Infelix puer, he will combat with a giant, run
first upon a breach, as another Philippus, he will ride into
the thickest of his enemies. Commend his housekeeping, and he
will beggar himself; commend his temperance, he will starve
himself.

"-- Laudataque virtus
Crescit, et immensum gloria calcar habet."
("Applauded virtue grows apace, and glory includes within it
an immense impulse.")

he is mad, mad, mad, no woe with him;-- impatiens consortis
erit, he will over the Alps to be talked of; or to maintain
his credit. Commend an ambitious man, some proud prince or
potentate, si plus aequo laudetur (saith Erasmus) cristas
erigit, exuit hominem, Deum se putat, he sets up his crest,
and will be no longer a man but a god.

"-- nihil est quod credere de se
Non audet quum laudatur diis aequa potestas."
("There is nothing which over-lauded power will not presume
to imagine of itself.")

How did this work with Alexander, that would needs be
Jupiter's son, and go like Hercules in a lion's skin?
Domitian a god (Dominus Deus noster sic fieri jubet), like
the Persian kings, whose image was adored by all that came
into the city of Babylon. Commodus the emperor was so gulled
by his flattering parasites, that he must be called Hercules.
Antonius the Roman would be crowned with ivy, carried in a
chariot, and adored for Bacchus. Cotys, king of Thrace, was
married to Minerva, and sent three several messengers one
after another, to see if she were come to his bed-chamber.
Such a one was Jupiter Menecrates, Maximinus Jovianus,
Dioclesianus Herculeus, Sapor the Persian king, brother of
the sun and moon, and our modern Turks, that will be gods on
earth, kings of kings, God's shadow, commanders of all that
may be commanded, our kings of China and Tartary in this
present age. Such a one was Xerxes, that would whip the sea,
fetter Neptune, stulta jactantia, and send a challenge to
Mount Athos; and such are many sottish princes, brought into
a fool's paradise by their parasites, 'tis a common humour,
incident to all men, when they are in great places, or come
to the solstice of honour, have done or deserved well, to
applaud and flatter themselves. Stultitiam suam produnt, &c.,
(saith Platerus) your very tradesmen if they be excellent,
will crack and brag, and show their folly in excess. They
have good parts, and they know it, you need not tell them of
it; out of a conceit of their worth, they go smiling to
themselves, a perpetual meditation of their trophies and
plaudits, they run at last quite mad, and lose their wits.
Petrarch, lib. 1. de contemptu mundi, confessed as much of
himself, and Cardan, in his fifth book of wisdom, gives an
instance in a smith of Milan, a fellow-citizen of his, one
Galeus de Rubeis, that being commended for refining of an
instrument of Archimedes, for joy ran mad. Plutarch in the
life of Artaxerxes, hath such a like story of one Chamus, a
soldier, that wounded king Cyrus in battle, and "grew
thereupon so arrogant, that in a short space after he lost
his wits." So many men, if any new honour, office,
preferment, booty, treasure, possession, or patrimony, ex
insperato fall unto them, for immoderate joy, and continual
meditation of it, cannot sleep or tell what they say or do,
they are so ravished on a sudden; and with vain conceits
transported, there is no rule with them. Epaminondas,
therefore, the next day after his Leuctrian victory, "came
abroad all squalid and submiss," and gave no other reason to
his friends of so doing, than that he perceived himself the
day before, by reason of his good fortune, to be too
insolent, overmuch joyed. That wise and virtuous lady, queen
Katherine, Dowager of England, in private talk, upon like
occasion, said, "that she would not willingly endure the
extremity of either fortune, but if  it were so, that of
necessity she must undergo the one, she would be in
adversity, because comfort was never wanting in it, but still
counsel and government were defective in the other:" they
could not moderate themselves.



SUBSECT. XV.-- Love of Learning, or overmuch study. With a
Digression on the misery of Scholars, and why the Muses are
Melancholy.


LEONARTUS FUSCHIUS, Instit. lib. iii. sect. 1. cap. 1, Foelix
Plater, lib. iii. de mentis alienat., Herc. de Saxonia,
Tract. post. de melanch. cap. 3, speak of a peculiar fury,
which comes by overmuch study. Fernelius, lib. 1, cap. 18,
"puts study, contemplation, and continual meditation, as an
especial cause of madness: and in his 86 consul. cites the
same words. Jo. Arculanus, in lib. 9, Rhasis ad Almansorem,
cap. 16, amongst other causes reckons up studium vehemens: so
doth Levinus Lemnius, lib. de occul. nat. mirac. lib. 1, cap.
16. "Many men (saith he) come to this malady by continual
study, and nightwaking, and of all other men, scholars are
most subject to it:" and such Rhasis adds, "that have
commonly the finest wits." Cont. lib. 1, tract. 9. Marsilius
Ficinus, de sanit. tuenda, lib. 1, cap. 7, puts melancholy
amongst one of those five principal plagues of students, 'tis
a common Maul unto them all, and almost in some measure an
inseparable companion. Varro belike for that cause calls
Tristes Philosophos et severos, severe, sad, dry, tetric, are
common epithets to scholars: and Patritius therefore, in the
instutition of princes, would not have them to be great
students. For (as Machiavel holds) study weakens their
bodies, dulls the spirits, abates their strength and courage;
and good scholars are never good soldiers, which a certain
Goth well perceived, for when his countrymen came into
Greece, and would have burned all their books, he cried out
against it, by no means they should do it, "leave them that
plague, which in time will consume all their vigour, and
martial spirits." The Turks abdicated Cornutus the next heir
from the empire, because he was so much given to his book:
and 'tis the common tenet of the world, that learning dulls
and diminisheth the spirits, and so per consequens produceth
melancholy.

Two main reasons may be given of it, why students should be
more subject to this malady than others. The one is, they
live a sedentary, solitary life, sibi et musis, free from
bodily exercise, and those ordinary disports which other men
use: and many times if discontent and idleness concur with
it, which is too frequent, they are precipitated into this
gulf on a sudden: but the common cause is overmuch study; too
much learning (as Festus told Paul) hath made thee mad; 'tis
that other extreme which effects it. So did Trincavellius,
lib. 1., consil. 12 and 13, find by his experience, in two of
his patients, a young baron, and another that contracted this
malady by too vehement study. So Forestus, observat. l. 10,
observ. 13, in a young divine in Louvaine, that was mad, and
said "he had a bible in his head:" Marsilius Ficinus de
sanit. tuend. lib. 1, cap. 1, 3, 4, and lib. 2, cap. 16,
gives many reasons, "why students dote more often than
others." The first is their negligence; "other men look to
their tools, a painter will wash his pencils, a smith will
look to his hammer, anvil, forge; a husbandman will mend his
plough-irons, and grind his hatchet, if it be dull; a
falconer or huntsman will have an especial care of his hawks, 
hounds, horses, dogs, &c., a musician will string and
unstring his lute, &c.; only scholars neglect that
instrument, their brain and spirits (I mean) which they daily
use, and by which they range overall the world, which by much
study is consumed." Vide (saith Lucian) ne funiculum nimis
intendendo, aliquando abrumpas: "See thou twist not the rope
so hard, till at length it break." Ficinus in his fourth
chap. gives some other reasons; Saturn and Mercury, the
patrons of learning, they are both dry planets: and Origanus
assigns the same cause, why Mercurialists are so poor, and
most part beggars; for that their president Mercury had no
better fortune himself. The destinies of old put poverty upon
him as a punishment; since when, poetry and beggary are
Gemelli, twin-born brats, inseparable companions;

"And to this day is every scholar poor;
Gross gold from them runs headlong to the boor:"

Mercury can help them to knowledge, but not to money. The
second is contemplation, "which dries the brain and
extinguisheth natural heat; for whilst the spirits are intent
to meditation above in the head, the stomach and liver are
left destitute, and thence come black blood and crudities by
defect of concoction, and for want of exercise the
superfluous vapours cannot exhale," &c. The same reasons are
repeated by Gomesius, lib. 4, cap. 1. de sale, Nymannus orat.
de imag. Jo. Voschius, lib. 2, cap. 5, de peste: and
something more they add, that hard students are commonly
troubled with gouts, catarrhs, rheums, cachexia,
bradiopepsia, bad eyes, stone and colic, crudities,
oppilations, vertigo, winds, consumptions, and all such
diseases as come by overmuch sitting; they are most part
lean, dry, ill-coloured, spend their fortunes, lose their
wits, and many times their lives, and all through immoderate
pains, and extraordinary studies. If you will not believe the
truth of this, look upon great Tostatus and Thomas Aquinas's
works, and tell me whether those men took pains? Peruse
Austin, Hierom, &c., and many thousands besides.

"Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam,
Multa tulit, fecitque puer, sudavit et alsit."
"He that desires this wished goal to gain,
Must sweat and freeze before he can attain,"

and labour hard for it. So did Seneca, by his own confession,
ep. 8. "Not a day that I spend idle, part of the night I keep
mine eyes open, tired with waking and now slumbering to their
continual task." Hear Tully pro Archia Poeta: "whilst others
loitered, and took their pleasures, he was continually at his
book," so they do that will be scholars, and that to the
hazard (I say) of their healths, fortunes, wits, and lives.
How much did Aristotle and Ptolemy spend? unius regni precium
they say, more than a king's ransom; how many crowns per
annum, to perfect arts, the one about his History of
Creatures, the other on his Almagest? How much time did
Thebet Benchorat employ, to find out the motion of the eighth
sphere? forty years and more, some write: how many poor
scholars have lost their wits, or become dizzards, neglecting
all worldly affairs and their own health, wealth, esse and
bene esse, to gain knowledge, for which, after all their
pains, in this world's esteem they are accounted ridiculous
and silly fools, idiots, asses, and (as oft they are)
rejected, contemned, derided, doting, and mad. Look for
examples in Hildesheim, spicel. 2, de mania et delirio: read
Trincavellius, l. 3. consil. 36, et c. 17. Montanus, consil.
233. Garceus de Judic. genit. cap. 33. Mercurialis consil.
86, cap. 25. Prosper Calculus in his Book de atra bile; Go to
Bedlam and ask. Or if they keep their wits, yet they are
esteemed scrubs and fools by reason of their carriage "after
seven years' study"

"-- statua taciturnius exit,
Plerumque et risu populum quatit."

"He becomes more silent than a statue, and generally excites
people's laughter." Because they cannot ride a horse, which
every clown can do; salute and court a gentlewoman, carve at
table, cringe and make congés, which every common swasher can
do, hos populus ridet, &&c., they are laughed to scorn, and
accounted silly fools by our gallants. Yea, many times, such
is their misery, they deserve it: a mere scholar, a mere ass.

"Obstipo capite, et figentes lumnine terram.
Murmura cum secum, et rabiosa silentia rodunt,
Atque experrecto trutinantur verbs labello,
Aegroti veteris meditantes somnia, gigni
De nihilo nihilum; in nihilum nil posse reverti."
"-- who lean awry
Their heads, piercing the earth with a fixt eye;
When by themselves, they gnaw their murmuring,
And furious silence, as 'twere balancing
Each word upon their outstretched lip, and when
They meditate the dreams of old sick men,
As, 'Out of nothing, nothing can be brought:
And that which is, can ne'er be turn'd to nought.'"

Thus they go commonly meditating unto themselves,thus they
sit, such is their action and gesture. Fulgosus, l. 8, c. 7,
makes mention how Th. Aquinas, supping with king Lewis of
France, upon a sudden knocked his fist upon the table, and
cried, conclusum est contra Manichaeos; his wits were a wool-
gathering, as they say, and his head busied about other
matters, when he perceived his error, he was much abashed.
Such a story there is of Archimedes in Vitruvius, thathaving
found out the means to know how much gold was mingled with
the silver in king Hiero's crown, ran naked forth from the
bath and cried e????a, [eureka] I have found: "and was
commonly so intent to his studies, that he never perceived
what was done about him: when the city was taken, and the
soldiers now ready to rifle his house, he took no notice of
it." St. Bernard rode all day long by the Lemnian lake, and
asked at last where he was, Marullus, lib. 2, cap. 4. It was
Democritus's carriage alone that made the Abderites suppose
him to have been mad, and sent for Hippocrates to cure him:
if he had been in any solemn company, he would upon all
occasions fall a laughing. Theophrastus saith as much of
Heraclitus, for that he continually wept, and Laertius of
Menedemus Lampsacus, because he ran like a madman, saying,
"he came from hell as a spy, to tell the devils what mortal
men did." Your greatest students are commonly no better,
silly, soft fellows in their outward behaviour, absurd,
ridiculous to others, and no whit experienced in worldly
business; they can measure the heavens, range over the world,
teach others wisdom, and yet in bargains and contracts they
are circumvented by every base tradesman. Are not these men
fools? and how should they be otherwise, but as so many sots
in schools, when (as he well observed) they neither hear nor
see such things as are commonly practised abroad? how should
they get experience, by what means? "I knew in my time many
scholars," saith Aeneas Sylvius (in an epistle of his to
Gasper Scitick, chancellor to the emperor), "excellent well
learned, but so rude, so silly, that they had no common
civility, nor knew how to manage their domestic or public
affairs." "Paglarensis was amazed, and said his farmer had
surely cozened him, when he heard him tell that his sow had
eleven pigs, and his ass had but one foal." To say the best
of this profession, I can give no other testimony of them in
general, than that of Pliny of Isaeus; "He is yet a scholar,
than which kind of men there is nothing so simple, so
sincere, none better, they are most part harmless, honest,
upright, innocent, plain-dealing men."

Now, because they are commonly subject to such hazards and
inconveniences as dotage, madness, simplicity, &c., Jo.
Voschius would have good scholars to be highly rewarded in
some extraordinary respect above other men, "to have greater
privileges than the rest, that adventure themselves and
abbreviate their lives for the public good." But our patrons
of learning are so far now-a-days from respecting the muses,
and giving that honour to scholars, or reward which they
deserve, and are allowed by those indulgent privileges of
many noble princes, that after all their pains taken in the
universities, cost and charge, expenses, irksome hours,
laborious tasks, wearisome days, dangers, hazards (barred
interim from all pleasures which other men have, mewed up
like hawks all their lives), if they chance to wade through
them, they shall in the end be rejected, contemned, and which
is their greatest misery, driven to their shifts, exposed to
want, poverty, and beggary. Their familiar attendants are,

"Pallentes morbi, luctus, curaeque laborque
Et metu, et malesuada fames, et turpis egestas,
Terribiles visit formae -- "
"Grief, labour, care, pale sickness, miseries,
Fear, filthy poverty, hunger that cries,
Terrible monsters to be seen with eyes."

if there were nothing else to trouble them, the conceit of
this alone were enough to make them all melancholy. Most
other trades and professions, after some seven years'
apprenticeship, are enabled by their craft to live of
themselves. A merchant adventures his goods at sea, and
though his hazard be great, yet if one ship return of four,
he likely makes a saving voyage. An husbandman's gains are
almost certain; quibus ipse Jupiter nocere non potest (whom
Jove himself can't harm), (tis Cato's hyperbole, a great
husband himself); only scholars methinks are most uncertain,
unrespected, subject to all casualties and hazards. For
first, not one of a many proves to be a scholar, all are not
capable and docile, ex omni ligno non fit Mercurius: we can
make majors and officers every year, but not scholars: kings
can invest knights and barons, as Sigismund the emperor
confessed; universities can give degrees; and Tu quod es, e
populo quilibet esse potest; but he nor they, nor all the 
world, can give learning, make philosophers, artists,
orators, poets; we can soon say, as Seneca well notes, O
virum bonum, O divitem, point at a rich man, a good, a happy
man, a prosperous man, sumptuose vestitum, Calamistratum,
bene olentem, magno temporis impendio constat haec laudatio,
o virum literarum, but 'tis not so easily performed to find
out a learned man. Learning is not so quickly got, though
they may be willing to take pains, to that end sufficiently
informed, and liberally maintained by their patrons and
parents, yet few can compass it. Or if they be docile, yet
all men's wills are not answerable to their wits, they can
apprehend, but will not take pains; they are either seduced
by bad companions, vel in puellani impingunt, vel in poculum
(they fall in with women or wine), and so spend their time to
their friends' grief and their own undoings. Or put case they
be studious, industrious, of ripe wits, and perhaps good
capacities, then how many diseases of body and mind must they
encounter? No labour in the world like unto study. It may be,
their temperature will not endure it, but striving to be
excellent to know all, they lose health, wealth, wit, life
and all. Let him yet happily escape all these hazards, aereis
intestinis, with a body of brass, and is now consummate and
ripe, he hath profited in his studies, and proceeded with all
applause: after many expenses, he is fit for preferment,
where shall he have it? he is as far to seek it as he was
(after twenty years' standing) at the first day of his coming
to the University. For what course shall he take, being now
capable and ready? The most parable and easy, and about which
many are employed, is to teach a school, turn lecturer or
curate, and for that he shall have falconer's wages, ten
pound per annum, and his diet, or some small stipend, so long
as he can please his patron or the parish; if they approve
him not (for usually they do but a year or two), as
inconstant as they that cried "Hosanna" one day, and "Crucify
him" the other; serving-manlike, he must go look a new
master; if they do, what is his reward?

"Hoc quoque te manet ut puero elementa docentum
Occupet extremis in vicris alba senectus.
"At last thy snow-white age in suburb schools,
Shall toil in teaching boys their grammar rules."

Like an ass, he wears out his time for provender, and can
show a stum rod, togam tritam et laceram, saith Haedus, an
old torn gown, an ensign of his infelicity, he hath his
labour for his pain, a modicum to keep him till he be
decrepit, and that is all. Grammaticus non est foelix, &c. If
he be a trencher chaplain in a gentleman's house, as it befel
Euphormio, after some seven years' service, he may perchance
have a living to the halves, or some small rectory with the
mother of the maids at length, a poor kinswoman, or a cracked
chambermaid, to have and to hold during the time of his life.
But if he offend his good patron, or displease his lady
mistress in the mean time,

"Ducetur Planta velut ictus ab Hereule Cacus,
Poneturque foras, si quid tentaverit nuquam
Hiscere --"

as Hercules did by Cacus, he shall be dragged forth of doors
by the heels, away with him. If he bend his forces to some
other studies, with an intent to be a secretis to some
nobleman, or in such a place with an ambassador, he shall
find that these persons like apprentices one under another,
and in so many tradesmen's shops, when the master is dead,
the foreman of the shop commonly steps in his place. Now for
poets, rhetoricians, historians, philosophers, &c.; they are
like grasshoppers, sing they must in summer, and pine in the
winter, for there is no preferment for them. Even so they
were at first, if you will believe that pleasant tale of
Socrates, which he told fair Phaedrus under a plane-tree, at
the banks of the river Iseus; about noon when it was hot, and
the grasshoppers made a noise, he took that sweet occasion to
tell him a tale, how grasshoppers were once scholars,
musicians, poets, &c, when the Muses were born, and lived
without meat and drink, and for that cause were turned by
Jupiter into grasshoppers. And may be turned again, In
Tythoni Cicadas, aut Liciorum ranas, for any reward I see
they are like to live: or else in the meantime, I would they
could live as they did, without any viaticum, like so many
manucodiatae, those Indian birds of paradise, we commonly
call them, those I mean that live with the air and dew of
heaven, and need no other food? for being as they are, their
"rhetoric only serves them to curse their bad fortunes," and
many of them for want of means are driven to hard shifts;
from grasshoppers they turn humble-bees and wasps, plain
parasites, and make the muses, mules, to satisfy their
hunger-starved paunches, and get a meal's meat. To say truth,
'tis the common fortune of most scholars, to be servile and
poor, to complain pitifully, and lay open their wants to
their respectless patrons, as Cardan doth, as Xilander and
many others: and which is too common in those dedicatory
epistles, for hope of gain, to lie, flatter, and with
hyperbolical eulogiums and commendations, to magnify and
extol an illiterate unworthy idiot, for his excellent
virtues, whom they should rather, as Machiavel observes,
vilify and rail at downright for his most notorious
villainies and vices. So they prostitute themselves as
fiddlers, or mercenary tradesmen, to serve great men's turns
for a small reward. They are like Indians, they have store of
gold, but know not the worth of it: for I am of Synesius's
opinion, "King Hiero got more by Simonides' acquaintance,
than Simonides did by his;" they have their best education,
good institution, sole qualification from us, and when they
have done well, their honour and immortality from us: we are
the living tombs, registers, and as so many trumpeters of
their fames: what was Achilles without Homer? Alexander
without Arrian and Curtius? who had known the Caesars, but
for Suetonius and Dion?

Vixerunt fortes ante Agamemnona
Multi: sed omnes illachrymabiles
Urgentur, ignotique longa
Nocte, carent quia vate sacro."
"Before great Agamemnon reign'd,
Reign'd kings as great as he, and brave,
Whose huge ambition's now contain'd
In the small compass of a grave:
In endless night they sleep, unwept, unknown,
No bard they had to make all time their own."

they are more beholden to scholars, than scholars to them;
but they undervalue themselves, and so by those great men are
kept down. Let them have that encyclopaedian, all the
learning in the world; they must keep it to themselves, "live
in base esteem, and starve, except they will submit," as
Budaius well hath it, "so many good parts, so many ensigns of
arts, virtues, be slavishly obnoxious to some illiterate
potentate, and live under his insolent worship, or honour,
like parasites," Qui tanquam mures alienum panem comedunt.
For to say truth, artes hae non sunt lucrativae, as Guido
Bonat that great astrologer could foresee, they be not
gainful arts these, sed esurientes et famelicae, but poor and
hungry.

"Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus honores,
Sed genus et species cogitur ire pedes;"
"The rich physician, honour'd lawyers ride,
While the poor scholar foots it by their side."

Poverty is the muses' patrimony, and as that poetical
divinity teacheth us, when Jupiter's daughters were each of
them married to the gods, the muses alone were left solitary,
Helicon forsaken of all suitors, and I believe it was,
because they had no portion.

"Calliope longum caelebs cur vixit in aevum?
Nempe nihil dotis, quad numeraret, erat."
"Why did Calliope live so long a maid?
Because she had no dowry to be paid."

Ever since all their followers are poor, forsaken and left
unto themselves. Insomuch, that as Petronius argues, you
shall likely know them by their clothes. "There came," saith
he, "by chance into my company, a fellow not very spruce to
look on, that I could perceive by that note alone he was a
scholar, whom commonly rich men hate: I asked him what he
was, he answered, a poet: I demanded again why he was so
ragged, he told me this kind of learning never made any man
rich."

"Qui Pelago credit, magno se foenore tollit.
Qui pugnas et rostra petit, praecingitur auro:
Vilis adulator picto jacet ebrius ostro,
Sola pruinosis horret facandia pannis."
"A merchant's gain is great, that goes to sea
A soldier embossed all in gold;
A flatterer lies fox'd in brave array;
A scholar only ragged to behold."

All which our ordinary students, right well perceiving in the
universities, how unprofitable these poetical, mathematical,
and philosophical studies are, how little respected, how few
patrons; apply themselves in all haste to those three
commodious professions of law, physic, and divinity, sharing
themselves between them, rejecting these arts in the
meantime, history, philosophy, philology, or lightly passing
them over, as pleasant toys fitting only table-talk, and to
furnish them with discourse. They are not so behoveful: he
that can tell his money hath arithmetic enough: he is a true
geometrician, can measure out a good fortune to himself; a
perfect astrologer that can cast the rise and fall of others,
and mark their errant motions to his own use. The best optics
are, to reflect the beams of some great men's favour and
grace to shine upon him. He is a good engineer, that alone
can make an instrument to get preferment. This was the common
tenet and practice of Poland, as Cromerus observed not long
since, in the first book of his history; their universities
were generally base, not a philosopher, a mathematician, an
antiquary, &c., to be found of any note amongst them, because
they had no set reward or stipend, but every man betook
himself to divinity, hoc solum in votis habens, opimam
sacerdotium, a good personage was their aim. This was the
practice of some of our near neighbours, as Lipsius inveighs,
"they thrust their children to the study of law and divinity,
before they be informed aright, or capable of such studies."
Scilicet omnibus artibus antistat spes lucri, et formosior et
cumulus auri, quam quicquid Graeci Latinique delirantes
scripserunt. Ex hoc numero deinde veniunt ad gubernacula
reipub. intersunt et praesunt consiliis regum, o pater o
patria? so he complained, and so may others. For even so we
find, to serve a great man, to get an office in some bishop's
court (to practise in some good town), or compass a benefice,
is the mark we shoot at, as being so advantageous, the
highway to preferment.

Although many times, for aught I can see, these men fail as
often as the rest in their projects, and are as usually
frustrate of their hopes. For let him be a doctor of the law,
an excellent civilian of good worth, where shall he practise
and expatiate? Their fields are so scant, the civil law with
us so contracted with prohibitions, so few causes, by reason
of those all-devouring municipal laws, quibus Nihil
illiteratius, saith Erasmus, an illiterate and a barbarous
study (for though they be never so well learned in it, I can
hardly vouchsafe them the name of scholars, except they be
otherwise qualified), and so few courts are left to that
profession, such slender offices, and those commonly to be
compassed at such dear rates, that I know not how an
ingenious man should thrive amongst them. Now for physicians,
there are in every village so many mountebanks, empirics,
quacksalvers, paracelsians, as they call themselves,
Caucifici et sanicidae, so Clenard terms them, wizards,
alchemists, poor vicars, cast apothecaries, physicians' men,
barbers, and good wives, professing great skill, that I make
great doubt how they shall be maintained, or who shall be
their patients. Besides, there are so many of both sorts, and
some of them such harpies, so covetous, so clamorous, so
impudent; and as he said, litigious idiots,

"Quibus loquacis affatim arrogantiae est,
Peritae parum aut nihil,
Nec ulla mica literarii salis,
Crumenimulga natio:
Loquuteleia turba, litium strophae,
Maligna litigantium cohors, togati vultures,
Lavernae alumni, Agyrtae," &c.
"Which have no skill but prating arrogance,
No learning, such a purse-milking nation;
Gown'd vultures, thieves, and a litigious rout
Of cozeners, that haunt this occupation," &c.

that they cannot well tell how to live one by another, but as
he jested in the Comedy of Clocks, they were so many, major
pars populi aridi reptant fame, they are almost starved a
great part of them, and ready to devour their fellows. Et
noxia callidite se corripere, such a multitude of
pettifoggers and empirics, such impostors, that an honest man
knows not in what sort to compose and behave himself in their
society, to carry himself with credit in so vile a rout,
scientiae nomen, tot sumptibus partum et vigiliis, profiteri
dispudeat, postquam, &c.

Last of all come to our divines, the most noble profession
and worthy of double honour, but of all others the most
distressed and miserable. If you will not believe me, hear a
brief of it, as it was not many years since publicly preached
at Paul's cross, by a grave minister then, and now a reverend
bishop of this land: "We that are bred up in learning, and
destinated by our parents to this end, we suffer our
childhood in the grammar-school, which Austin calls magnam
tyrannidem, et grave malum, and compares it to the torments
of martyrdom; when we come to the university, if we live of
the college allowance, as Phalaris objected to the Leontines,
pa?ta? e?de?? p??? ??µ?? ?a? f?ß?? [pantan endeis plen limoy
kai phoboy],  needy of all things but hunger and fear, or if
we be maintained but partly by our parents' cost, do expend
in unnecessary maintenance, books and degrees, before we come
to any perfection, five hundred pounds, or a thousand marks.
If by this price of the expense of time, our bodies and
spirits, our substance and patrimonies, we cannot purchase
those small rewards, which are ours by law, and the right of
inheritance, a poor parsonage, or a vicarage of £50 per
annum, but we must pay to the patron for the lease of a life
(a spent and out-worn life) either in annual pension, or 
above the rate of a copyhold, and that with the hazard and
loss of our souls, by simony and perjury, and the forfeiture
of all our spiritual preferments, in esse and posse, both
present and to come. What father after a while will be so
improvident to bring up his son to his great charge, to this
necessary beggary? What Christian will be so irreligious, to
bring up his son in that course of life, which by all
probability and necessity, coget ad turpia, enforcing to sin,
will entangle him in simony and perjury, when as the poet
said, Invitatus ad haec aliquis de ponte negabit: "a beggar's
brat taken from the bridge where he sits a begging, if he
knew the inconvenience, had cause to refuse it." This being
thus, have not we fished fair all this while, that are
initiate divines, to find no better fruits of our labours,
hoc est cur palles, cur quis non prandeat hoc est? do we
macerate ourselves for this? Is it for this we rise so early
all the year long? "leaping(as he saith) out of our beds,
when we hear the bell ring as if we had heard a thunderclap."
If this be all the respect, reward and honour we shall have,
frange leves calamos, et scinde Thalia libellos; let us give
over our books, and betake ourselves to some other course of
life; to what end should we study? Quid me litterulas stulti
docuere parentes, what did our parents mean to make us
scholars, to be as far to seek of preferment after twenty
years' study, as we were at first: why do we take such pains?
Quid tantum inanis Juvat impallescere chartis? If there be no
more hope of reward, no better encouragement, I say again,
Frange leves calamos, et scinde Thalia libellos; let's turn
soldiers, sell our books, and buy swords, guns, and pikes, or
stop bottles with them, turn our philosopher's gowns, as
Cleanthes once did, into millers' coats, leave all, and
rather betake ourselves to any other course of life, than to
continue longer in this misery. Praestat dentiscalpia radere,
quam literariis monumentis magnatum favorem emendicare.

Yea, but methinks I hear some man except at these words, that
though this be true which I have said of the estate of
scholars, and especially of divines, that it is miserable and
distressed at this time, that the church suffers shipwreck of
her goods, and that they have just cause to complain; there
is a fault, but whence proceeds it? If the cause were justly
examined, it would be retorted upon ourselves, if we were
cited at that tribunal of truth, we should be found guilty,
and not able to excuse it. That there is a fault among us, I
confess, and were there not a buyer, there would not be a
seller: but to him that will consider better of it, it will
more than manifestly appear that the fountain of these
miseries proceeds from these griping patrons. In accusing
them, I do not altogether excuse us; both are faulty, they
and we: yet in my judgment, theirs is the greater fault, more
apparent causes, and much to be condemned. For my part, if it
be not with me as I would, or as it should, I do ascribe the
cause, as Cardan did in the like case; meo infortunio potias
quam illorum sceleri, to mine own infelicity rather than
their naughtiness; although I have been baffled in my time by
some of them, and have as just cause to complain as another:
or rather indeed to mine own negligence; for I was ever like
that Alexander in Plutarch, Crassus his tutor in philosophy,
who, though he lived many years familiarly with rich Crassus,
was even as poor when from, (which many wondered at) as when
he came first to him; he never asked, the other never gave
him any thing; when he travelled with Crassus he borrowed a
hat of him, at his return restored it again. I have had some
such noble friends acquaintance and scholars, but most part
(common courtesies and ordinary respects excepted), they and
I parted as we met, they gave me as much as I requested, and
that was -- And as Alexander ab Alexandro, Genial. dier. l.
6. c. 16. made answer to Hieronimus Massainus, that wondered,
quum plures ignavos et ignobiles ad dignitates et sacerdotia
promotos quotidie videret, when other men rose, still he was
in the same state, eodem tenore et fortuna cui mercedem
laborum studioromque deberi putaret, whom he thought to
deserve as well as the rest. He made answer, that he was
content with his present estate, was not ambitious, and
although objurgabundus suas segnitiem accusaret, cum obscurae
sortis homines ad sacerdotia et pontificatus evectos, &c., he
chid him for his backwardness, yet he was still the same: and
for my part (though I be not worthy perhaps to carry
Alexander's books) yet by some overweening and well-wishing
friends, the like speeches have been used to me; but I 
replied still with Alexander, that I had enough, and more
peradventure than I deserved; and with Libanius Sophista,
that rather chose (when honours and offices by the emperor
were offered unto him) to be talis Sophista, quam talis
Magistratus. I had as lief be still Democritus junior, and
privus privatus, si mihi jam daretur optio, quam talis
fortasse Doctor, talis Dominus.-- Sed quorsum haec? For the
rest 'tis on both sides facinus detestandum, to buy and sell
livings, to detain from the church, that which God's and
men's laws have bestowed on it; but in them most, and that
from the covetousness and ignorance of such as are interested
in this business; I name covetousness in the first place, as
the root of all these mischiefs, which, Achan-like, compels
them to commit sacrilege, and to make simoniacal compacts,
(and what not) to their own ends, that kindles God's wrath,
brings a plague, vengeance, and a heavy visitation upon
themselves and others. Some out of that insatiable desire of
filthy lucre, to be enriched, care not how they come by it
per fas et nefas, hook or crook, so they have it. And others
when they have with riot and prodigality embezzled their
estates, to recover themselves, make a prey of the church,
robbing it, as Julian the apostate did, spoil parsons of
their revenues (in keeping half back as a great man amongst
us observes): "and that maintenance on which they should
live:" by means whereof, barbarism is increased, and a great
decay of christian professors: for who will apply himself to
these divine studies, his son, or friend, when after great
pains taken, they shall have nothing whereupon to live? But
with what event do they these things-

"Opesque totis viribus venamini
At inde messis accidit miserrima."

They toil and moil, but what reap they? They are commonly
unfortunate families that use it, accursed in their progeny,
and, as common experience evinceth, accursed themselves in
all their proceedings. "With what face (as he quotes out of
Aust.) can they expect a blessing or inheritance from Christ
in heaven, that defraud Christ of his inheritance here on
earth?" I would all our simoniacal patrons, and such as
detain tithes, would read those judicious tracts of Sir Henry
Spelman, and Sir James Sempill, knights; those late elaborate
and learned treatises of Dr. Tilflye, and Mr. Montague, which
they have written of that subject. But though they should
read, it would be to small purpose, clames licet et mare
coelo confundas; thunder, lighten, preach hell and damnation,
tell them 'tis a sin, they will not believe it; denounce and
terrify, they have cauterised consciences, they do not
attend, as the enchanted adder, they stop their ears. Call
them base, irreligious, profane, barbarous, pagans, atheists,
epicures, (as some of them surely are) with the bawd in
Plautus, Euge, optime, they cry and applaud themselves with
that miser, simul ac nummos contemplor in arca: say what you
will, quocunque modo rem: as a dog barks at the moon, to no
purpose are your sayings: Take your heaven, let them have
money. A base, profane, epicurean, hypocritical rout: for my
part, let them pretend what zeal they will, counterfeit
religion, blear the world's eyes, bombast themselves, and
stuff out their greatness with church spoils, shine like so
many peacocks; so cold is my charity, so defective in this
behalf, that I shall never think better of them, than that
they are rotten at core, their bones are full of epicurean
hypocrisy, and atheistical marrow, they are worse than
heathens. For as Dionysius Halicarnasseus observes, Antiq.
Rom. lib. 7. Primum locum, &c. "Greeks and Barbarians observe
all religious rites, and dare not break them for fear of
offending their gods; but our simoniacal contractors, our
senseless Achans, our stupified patrons, fear neither God nor
devil, they have evasions for it, it is no sin, or not due
jure divino, or if a sin, no great sin, &c. And though they
be daily punished for it, and they do manifestly perceive,
that as he said, frost and fraud come to foul ends; yet as
Chrysostom follows it, Nulla ex poena sit correctio, et quasi
adversis malitia hominum provocetur, crescit quotidie quod
puniatur: they are rather worse than better,-- iram atque
animos a crimine sumunt, and the more they are corrected, the
more they offend: but let them take their course, Rode,
caper, vites, go on still as they begin, 'tis no sin, let
them rejoice secure, God's vengeance will overtake them in
the end, and these ill-gotten goods, as an eagle's feathers,
will consume the rest of their substance; it is aurum
Tholosanum, and will produce no better effects. "Let them lay
it up safe, and make their conveyances never so close, lock
and shut door," saith Chrysostom, "yet fraud and
covetousness, two most violent thieves, are still included,
and a little gain evil gotten will subvert the rest of their
goods." The eagle in AEsop, seeing a piece of flesh, now
ready to be sacrificed, swept it away with her claws, and
carried it to her nest; but there was a burning coal stuck to
it by chance, which unawares consumed her young ones, nest,
and all together. Let our simoniacal church-chopping patrons,
and sacrilegious harpies, look for no better success.

A second cause is ignorance, and from thence contempt,
successit odium in literas ab ignorantia vulgi; which Junius
well perceived: this hatred and contempt of learning proceeds
out of ignorance; as they are themselves barbarous, idiots,
dull, illiterate, and proud, so they esteem of others. Sint
Mecaenates, non deerunt, Flacce, Marones: Let there be
bountiful patrons, and there will be painful scholars in all
sciences. But when they contemn learning, and think
themselves sufficiently qualified, if they can write and
read, scramble at a piece of evidence, or have so much Latin
as that emperor had, qui nescit dissimulare, nescit virere,
(he that cannot dissemble, cannot live) they are unfit to do
their country service, to perform or undertake any action or
employment, which may tend to the good of a commonwealth,
except it be to fight, or to do country justice, with common
sense, which every yeoman can likewise do. And so they bring
up their children, rude as they are themselves, unqualified,
untaught, uncivil most part. Quis e nostra juventute legitime
instituitur literis? Quis oratores aut philosophos tangit?
quis historium legit, illam rerum agendarum quasi animam? 
praecipitant parentes vota tua, &c. 'twas Lipsius' complaint
to his illiterate countrymen, it may be ours. Now shall these
men judge of a scholar's worth, that have no worth, that know
not what belongs to a student's labours, that cannot
distinguish between a true scholar and a drone? or him that
by reason of a voluble tongue, a strong voice, a pleasing
tone, and some trivially polyanthean helps, steals and gleans
a few notes from other men's harvests, and so makes a fairer
show, than he that is truly learned indeed: that thinks it no
more to preach, than to speak. "or to run away with an empty
cart;" as a grave man said; and thereupon vilify us, and our
pains; scorn us, and all learning. Because they are rich, and
have other means to live, they think it concerns them not to
know, or to trouble themselves with it; a fitter task for
younger brothers, or poor men's sons, to be pen and inkhorn
men, pedantical slaves, and no whit beseeming the calling of
a gentleman, as Frenchmen and Germans commonly do, neglect
therefore all human learning, what have they to do with it?
Let mariners learn astronomy; merchants, factors study
arithmetic; surveyors get them geometry; spectacle-makers
optics; landleapers geography; town-clerks rhetoric, what
should he do with a spade, that hath no ground to dig; or
they with learning, that hath no use of it? thus they reason,
and are not ashamed to let mariners, apprentices, and the
basest servants, be better qualified than themselves. In
former times, kings, princes, and emperors, were the only
scholars, excellent in all faculties.

Julius Caesar mended the year, and writ his own Commentaries,

"-- media inter praelia semper,
Stellarum coelique plagis, superisque vacavit."

Antonius, Adrian, Nero, Seve. Jul &c. Michael the emperor,
and Isacius, were so much given to their studies, that no
base fellow would take so much pains: Orion, Perseus,
Alphonsus, Ptolomeus, famous astronomers; Sabor, Mithridates,
Lysimachus, admired physicians: Plato's kings all: Evax, that
Arabian prince, a most expert jeweller, and an exquisite
philosopher; the kings of Egypt were priests of old, chosen
and from thence,-- Idem rexi hominum, Phoebique sacerdos: but
those heroical times are past; the Muses are now banished in
this bastard age, ad sordida tuguriola, to meaner persons,
and confined alone almost to universities. In those days,
scholars were highly beloved, honoured, esteemed; as old
Ennius by Scipio Africanus, Virgil by Augustus; Horace by
Mecaenas: princes' companions; dear to them, as Anacreon to
Polycrates; Philoxenus to Dionysius, and highly rewarded.
Alexander sent Xenocrates the Philosopher fifty talents,
because he was poor, visu rerum, aut eruditione praestantes
viri, mensis olim regum adhibiti, as Philostratus relates of
Adrian and Lampridius of Alexander Severus: famous clerks
came to these princes' courts, velut in Lycaeum, as to a
university, and were admitted to their tables, quasi divum
apulis accumbentes; Archilaus, that Macedonian king, would
not willingly sup without Euripides (amongst the rest he
drank to him at supper one night and gave him a cup of gold
for his pains), delectatus poetae suavi sermone; and it was
fit it should be so; because, as Plato in his Protagoras well
saith, a good philosopher as much excels other men, as a
great king doth the commons of his country; and again,
quoniam illis nihil deest, et minime egere solent, et
disciplinas quas profitentur, soli a contemptu vindicare
possunt, they needed not to beg so basely, as they compel
scholars in our times to complain of poverty, or crouch to a
rich chuff for a meal's meat, but could vindicate themselves,
and those arts which they professed. Now they would and
cannot: for it is held by some of them, as an axiom, that to
keep them poor,will make them study; they must be dieted, as
horses to a race, not pampered, Alendos volunt, non
saginandos, ne meloris mentis flammula extinguatur; a fat
bird will not sing, a fat dog cannot hunt, and so by this
depression of theirs, some want means, others will, all want
encouragement, as being forsaken almost; and generally
contemned. 'Tis an old saying, Sint Mecaenates, non deerunt,
Flacce, Marones: and 'tis a true saying still. Yet
oftentimes, I may not deny it, the main fault is in
ourselves. Our academics too frequently offend in neglecting
patrons, as Erasmus well taxeth,or making ill choice of them;
negligimus oblatos aut amplectimur parum aptos, or if we get
a good one, non studemus mutuis officiis favorem ejus alere,
we do not ply and follow him as we should. Idem mihi accidit
Adolescenti (saith Erasmus) acknowledging his fault, et
gravissimi peccavi, and so may I say myself; I have offended
in this, and so peradveuture have many others. We did not
spondere magnatum favoribus, qui coeperunt nos amplecti,
apply ourselves with that readiness we should: idleness, love
of liberty, immodicus amor libertatis effecit ut diu cum
perfidis amicis, as he confesseth, et pertinaci paupertate
colluctarer, bashfulness, melancholy, timorousness, cause
many of us to be too backward and remiss. So some offend in
one extreme, but too many on the other, we are most part too
forward, too solicitous, too ambitious, too impudent; we
commonly complain deesse Maecenates, of want of
encouragement, want of means, when as the true defect is in
our own want of work, our insufficiency: did Maecenas take
notice of Horace or Virgil till they had shown themselves
first? or had Bavius and Mevius any patrons? Egregium
specimen dent, saith Erasmus, let them approve themselves
worthy first, sufficiently qualified for learning and
manners, before they presume or impudently intrude and put
themselves on great men as too many do, with such base
flattery, parasitical, colloguing, such hyperbolical elogies
they do usually insinuate, that it is a shame to hear and
see. Immodicae laudes conciliant invidiam, potius quam
laudem, and vain commendations derogate from truth, and we
think in conclusion, non melius de laudato, pejus de
laudante, ill of both, the commender and commended. So we
offend, but the main fault is in their harshness, defect of
patrons. How beloved of old, and how much respected was Plato
to Dionysius? How dear to Alexander was Aristotle, Demeratus
to Philip, Solon to Croesus, Anexarcus and Trebatius to
Augustus, Cassius to Vespasian, Plutarch to Trajan, Seneca to
Nero, Simonides to Hiero? how honoured?

"Sed haec prius fuere, nunc recondita
Senent quiete,"

those days are gone; Et spes, et ratio studiorum in Caesare
tantum: (All our hopes and inducements to study are centred
in Caesar ) as he said of old, we may truly say now, he is
our amulet, our sun, our sole comfort and refuge, our
Ptolemy, our common Maecenas, Jacobus munificus, Jacobus
pacificus, mysta Musarum; Rex Platonicus: Grande decus,
columenque nostrum: a famous scholar himself; and the sole
patron, pillar, and sustainer of learning: but his worth in
this kind is so well known, that as Paterculus of Cato, Jam
ipsum laudare nefas sit: and which Pliny to Trajan, seria te
carmina, honorque aeternus annalium, non haec brevis et
pudenda praedicatio colet. But he is now gone, the sun of
ours set, and yet no night follows, Sol occubit, nox nulla
sequuta est. We have such another in his room, aureus alter,
Avulsus, simili frondescit virga metallo, and long may he
reign and flourish amongst us.

Let me not be malicious, and lie against my genius, I may not
deny, but that we have a sprinkling of our gentry, here and
there one, excellently well learned, like those Fuggeri in
Germany; Dubartus, Du Plessis, Sadael, in France; Picus
Mirandula, Schottus, Barotius, in Italy; Apparent rari nantes
in gurgite vasto. But they are but few in respect of the
multitude, the major part (and some again excepted, that are
indifferent) are wholly bent for hawks and hounds, and
carried away many times with intemperate lust, gaming and
drinking. If they read a book at any time (si quod est
interim otii a venatu, poculis, alea, scortis) 'tis an
English Chronicle, St. Huon of Bordeaux, Amadis de Gaul, &c.,
a play book, or some pamphlet of news, and that at such
seasons only, when they cannot stir abroad, to drive away
time, their sole discourse is dogs, hawks, horses, and what
news? If some one have been a traveller in Italy, or as far
as the emperor's court, wintered in Orleans, and can court
his mistress in broken French, wear his clothes neatly in the
newest fashion, sing some choice outlandish tunes, discourse
of lords, ladies, towns, palaces, and cities, he is complete
and to be admired: otherwise he and they are much at one; no
difference between the master and the man, but worshipful
titles: wink and choose betwixt him that sits down (clothes
excepted) and him that holds the trencher behind him: yet
these men must be our patrons, our governors too sometimes,
statesmen, magistrates, noble, great, and wise by
inheritance.

Mistake me not (I say again) Vos, O Patritius sanguis, you
that are worthy senators, gentlemen, I honour your names and
persons, and with all submissiveness, prostrate myself to
your censure and service. There are amongst you, I do
ingenuously confess, many well-deserving patrons, and true
patriots, of my knowledge, besides many hundreds which I
never saw, no doubt, or heard of; pillars of our
commonwealth, whose worth, bounty, learning, forwardness,
true zeal in religion, and good esteem of all scholars, ought
to be consecrated to all posterity; but of your rank, there
are a debauched, corrupt, covetous, illiterate crew again, no
better than stocks, merum pecus (testor Deum, non mihi videri
dignos ingenui hominis appellatione), barbarous Thracians, et
quis ille thrax qui hoc neget? a sordid, profane, pernicious
company, irreligious, impudent and stupid, I know not what
epithets to give them, enemies to learning, confounders of
the church, and the ruin of a commonwealth; patrons they are
by right of inheritance, and put in trust freely to dispose
of such livings to the church's good; but (hard taskmasters
they prove) they take away their straw and compel them to
make their number of bricks, they commonly respect their own
ends, commodity is the steer of all their actions, and him
they present in conclusion, as a man of greatest gifts, that
will give most; no penny, no pater-noster, as the saying is.
Nisi preces auro fulcias, amplius irritas: Ut Cerberus offa,
their attendants and officers must be bribed, feed, and made,
as Cerberus is with a sop by him that goes to hell. It was an
old saying, Omnia Romae venalia (all things are venal at
Rome), 'tis a rag of Popery, which will never be rooted out,
there is no hope, no good to be done without money. A clerk
may offer himself; approve his worth, learning, honesty,
religion, zeal, they will commend him for it; but probitas
laudatur et alget. If he be a man of extraordinary parts,
they will flock afar off to hear him, as they did in
Apuleius, to see Psyche: multi mortales confluebant ad
videndum saeculi decus, speculum gloriosum, laudatur ab
omnibus, spectatur ab omnibus, nec quisquam non rex, non
regius, cupidus eius nuptiarum petitor accedit; miratur
quidem divinam formam omnes, sed ut simulacrum fabre politum
mirantur; many mortal men came to see fair Psyche the glory
of her age, they did admire her, commend, desire her for her
divine beauty, and gaze upon her; but as on a picture; none
would marry her, quod indotata, fair Psyche had no money. So
they do by learning;

"-- didicit jam dives avarus
Tantum admirari, tantum laudare disertos,
Ut pueri Junonis avem --"
"Your rich men have now learn'd of latter days
T'admire, commend, and come together
To hear and see a worthy scholar speak,
As children do a peacock's feather."

He shall have all the good words that may be given, a proper
man, and 'tis pity he hath no preferment, all good wishes,
but inexorable, indurate as he is, he will not prefer him,
though it be in his power, because he is indotatus, he hath
no money. Or if he do give him entertainment, let him be
never so well qualified, plead affinity, consanguinity,
sufficiency, he shall serve seven years, as Jacob did for
Rachel, before he shall have it. If he will enter at first,
he must get in at that Simoniacal gate, come off soundly and
put in good security to perform all covenants, else he will
not deal with, or admit him. But if some poor scholar, some
parson chaff, will offer himself; some trencher chaplain,
that will take it to the halves, thirds, or accept of what he
will give, he is welcome; be conformable, preach as he will
have him, he likes him before a million of others; for the
best is always best cheap: and then as Hierom said to
Cromatius, patella dignum operculum, such a patron, such a
clerk; the care is well supplied, and all parties pleased. So
that is still verified in our age, which Chrysostom
complained of in his time, Qui opulentiores sunt, in ordinem
parasitorum cogunt eos, et ipsos tanquam canes ad mensas suas
enutriunt, eorumque impudentes Ventres iniquarum coenarum
reliquiis differtiunt, iisdem pro arbitrio abutentes: Rich 
men keep these lecturers, and fawning parasites, like so many
dogs at their tables, and filling their hungry guts with the
offals of their meat, they abuse them at their pleasure, and
make them say what they propose. "As children do by a bird or
a butterfly in a string, pull in and let him out as they
list, do they by their trencher chaplains, prescribe, command
their wits, let in and out as to them it seems best." If the
patron be precise, so must his chaplain be; if he be
papistical, his clerk must be so too, or else be turned out.
These are those clerks which serve the turn, whom they
commonly entertain, and present to church livings, whilst in
the meantime we that are University men, like so many hide-
bound calves in a pasture, tarry out our time, wither away as
a flower ungathered in a garden, and are never used; or as so
many candles, illuminate ourselves alone, obscuring one
another's light, and are not discerned here at all the least
of which, translated to a dark room, or to some country
benefice, where it might shine apart, would give a fair
light, and be seen over all. Whilst we lie waiting here as
those sick men did at the Pool of Bethesda, till the Angel
stirred the water, expecting a good hour, they step between,
and beguile us of our preferment. I have not yet said, if
after long expectation, much expense, travel, earnest suit of
ourselves and friends, we obtain a small benefice at last;
our misery begins afresh, we are suddenly encountered with
the flesh, world, and devil, with a new onset; we change a
quiet life for an ocean of troubles, we come to a ruinous
house, which before it be habitable, must be necessarily to
our great damage repaired; we are compelled to sue for
dilapidations, or else sued ourselves, and scarce yet
settled, we are called upon for our predecessor's arrearages;
first-fruits, tenths, subsidies, are instantly to be paid,
benevolence, procurations, &c., and which is most to be
feared, we light upon a cracked title, as it befel Clenard,
of Brabant, for his rectory and charge of his Beginae; he is
no sooner inducted, but instantly sued, coepimusque (saith
he) strenue litigare, et implacabili bello confligere: at
length, after ten years' suit, as long as Troy's siege, when
he had tired himself and spent his money, he was fain to
leave all for quietness' sake, and give it up to his
adversary. Or else we are insulted over, and trampled on by
domineering officers, fleeced by those greedy harpies to get
more fees; we stand in fear of some precedent lapse; We fall
amongst refractory, seditious sectaries, peevish puritans,
perverse papists, a lascivious rout of atheistical Epicures,
that will not be reformed, or some litigious people (those
wild beasts of Ephesus must be fought with) that will not pay
their dues without much repining, or compelled by long suit;
Laici clericis oppido infesti, an old axiom, all they think
well gotten that is had from the church, and by such uncivil,
harsh dealings, they make their poor minister weary of his
place, if not his life; and put case they be quiet honest
men, make the best of it, as often it falls out, from a
polite and terse academic, he must turn rustic, rude,
melancholise alone, learn to forget, or else, as many do,
become maltsters, graziers, chapmen, &c. (now banished from
the academy, all commerce of the muse; and confined to a
country village, as Ovid was from Rome to Pontus), and daily
converse with a company of idiots and clowns.

As for ourselves (for neither are we free from this fault)
the same guilt, the same crime, may be objected against us:
for it is through our fault, negligence, and avarice, that so
many and such shameful corruptions occur in the church (both
the temple and the Deity are offered for sale), that such
sordidness is introduced, such impiety committed, such
wickedness, such a mad gulf of wretchedness and irregularity
-- these I say arise from all our faults, but more
particularly from ours of the University. We are the nursery
in which those ills are bred with which the state is
afflicted; we voluntarily introduce them, and are deserving
of every opprobrium and suffering, since we do not afterwards
encounter them according to our strength. For what better can
we expect when so many poor, beggarly fellows, men of every
order, are readily and without election, admitted to degrees?
Who, if they can only commit to memory a few definitions and
divisions, and pass the customary period in the study of
logics, no matter with what effect, whatever sort they prove
to be, idiots, triflers, idlers, gamblers, sots, sensualists,

"-- mere ciphers in the book of life
Like those who boldly woo'd Ulysses' wife;
Born to consume the fruits of earth: in truth,
As vain and idle as Pheacia's youth;"

only let them have passed the stipulated period in the
university, and professed themselves collegians: either for
the sake of profit, or through the influence of their
friends, they obtain a presentation; nay, sometimes even
accompanied by brilliant eulogies upon their morals and
acquirements; and when they are about to take leave, they are
honoured with the most flattering literary testimonials in
their favour, by those who undoubtedly sustain a loss of
reputation in granting them. For doctors and professors (as
an author says) are anxious about one thing only, viz., that
out of their various callings they may promote their own
advantage, and convert the public loss into their private
gains. For our annual officers wish this only, that those who
commence, whether they are taught or untaught is of no
moment, shall be sleek, fat, pigeons, worth the plucking. The
Philosophastic are admitted to a degree in Arts, because they
have no acquaintance with them. And they are desired to be
wise men, because they are endowed with no wisdom, and bring
no qualification for a degree, except the wish to have it.
The Theologastic (only let them pay) thrice learned, are
promoted to every academic honour. Hence it is that so many
vile buffoons, so many idiots everywhere, placed in the
twilight of letters, the mere ghosts of scholars, wanderers
in the market place, vagrants, barbels, mushrooms, dolts,
asses, a growling herd, with unwashed feet, break into the
sacred precincts of theology, bringing nothing along with
them but an impudent front, some vulgar trifles and foolish
scholastic technicalities, unworthy of respect even at the
crossing of the highways. This is the unworthy, vagrant,
voluptuous race, fitter for the hog-sty (haram) than the
altar (aram), that basely prostitute divine literature; these
are they who fill the pulpits, creep into the palaces of our
nobility after all other prospects of existence fail them,
owing to their imbecility of body and mind, and their being
incapable of sustaining any other parts in the commonwealth;
to this sacred refuge they fly, undertaking the office of the
ministry, not from sincerity, but as St. Paul says,
huckstering the word of God. Let not any one suppose that it
is here intended to detract from those many exemplary men of
which the Church of England may boast, learned, eminent, and
of spotless fame, for they are more numerous in that than in
any other church of Europe: not from those most learned
universities which constantly send forth men endued with
every form of virtue. And these seminaries would produce a
still greater number of inestimable scholars hereafter if
sordidness did not obscure the splendid light, corruption
interrupt, and certain truckling harpies and beggars envy
them their usefulness. Nor can any one be so blind as not to
perceive this -- any so stolid as not to understand it -- any
so perverse as not to acknowledge how sacred Theology has
been contaminated by those notorious idiots, and the
celestial Muse treated with profanity. Vile and shameless
souls (says Luther) for the sake of gain, like flies to a
milk-pail, crowd round the tables of the nobility in
expectation of a church living, any office, or honour, and
flock into any public hall or city ready to accept of any
employment that may offer.

"A thing of wood and wires by others played."

Following the paste as the parrot, they stutter out any thing
in hopes of reward: obsequious parasites, says Erasmus,
teach, say, write, admire, approve, contrary to their
conviction, anything you please, not to benefit the people
but to improve their own fortunes. They subscribe to any
opinions and decisions contrary to the word of God, that they
may not offend their patron but retain the favour of the
great, the applause of the multitude, and thereby acquire
riches for themselves; for they approach Theology, not that
they may perform a sacred duty, but make a fortune: not to
promote the interest of the church, but to pillage it:
seeking, as Paul says, not the things which are of Jesus
Christ, but what may be their own: not the treasure of their
Lord, but the enrichment of themselves and their followers.
Nor does this evil belong to those of humbler birth and
fortunes only, it possesses the middle and higher ranks,
bishops excepted.

"O Pontiffs, tell the efficacy of gold in sacred matters!"
Avarice often leads the highest men astray, and men,
admirable in all other respects: these find a salvo for
simony; and, striking against this rock of corruption, they
do not shear but flay the flock; and, wherever they teem,
plunder, exhaust, raze, making shipwreck of their reputation,
if not of their souls also. Hence it appears that this malady
did not flow from the humblest to the highest classes, but
vice versa, so that the maxim is true although spoken in jest
--"he bought first, therefore has the best right to sell."
For a Simoniac, (that I may use the phraseology of Leo) has
not received a favour: since he has not received one he does
not possess one; and since he does not possess one he cannot
confer one. So far indeed are some of those who are placed at
the helm from promoting others, that they completely obstruct
them, from a consciousness of the means by which themselves
obtained the honour. For he who imagines that they emerged
from their obscurity through their learning, is deceived;
indeed, whoever supposes promotion to be the reward of
genius, erudition, experience, probity, piety, and poetry
(which formerly was the case, but now-a-days is only
premised) is evidently deranged. How or when this malady
commenced, I shall not further inquire; but from these
beginnings, this accumulation of vices, all her calamities
and miseries have been brought upon the Church; hence such
frequent acts of simony, complaints, fraud, impostures --
from this one fountain spring all its its conspicuous
iniquities. I shall not press the question of ambition and
courtly flattery, lest they may be chagrined about luxury,
base examples of life, which offend the honest, wanton
drinking parties, &c. Yet, hence is that academic squalor,
the muses now look sad, since every low fellow ignorant of
the arts, by those very arts rises, is promoted, and grows
rich, distinguished by ambitious titles, and puffed up by his
numerous honours: he just shows himself to the vulgar, and by
his stately carriage displays a species of majesty, a
remarkable solicitude, letting down a flowing beard, decked
in a brllliant toga resplendent with purple, and respected
also on account of the splendour of his household and number
of his servants. There are certain statues placed in sacred
edifices that seem to sink under their load, and almost to
perspire, when in reality they are void of sensation, and do
not contribute to the stony stability, so these men would
wish to look like Atlases, when they are no better than
statues of stone, insignificant scrubs, funguses, dolts,
little different from stone statues. Meanwhile really learned
men, endowed with all that can adorn a holy life, men who
have endured the heat of mid-day, by some unjust lot obey
these dizzards, content probably with a miserable salary,
known by honest appellations, humble, obscure, although
eminently worthy, needy, leading a private life without
honour, buried alive in some poor benefice, or incarcerated
for ever in their college chambers, lying hid ingloriously.
But I am unwilling to stir this sink any longer or any
deeper: hence those tears, this melancholy habit of the
muses; hence (that I may speak with Secellius, is it that
religion is brought into disrepute and contempt, and the
priesthood abject: (and since this is so, I must speak out
and use the filthy witticism of the filthy) a foetid crowd,
poor, sordid, melancholy, miserable, despicable,
contemptible.



MEMB. IV

SUBSECT. I.-- Non-necessary, remote, outward adventitious, or
accidental causes: as first from the Nurse.


OF those remote, outward, ambient, necessary causes, I have
sufficiently discoursed in the precedent member, the non-
necessary follow; of which, saith  Fuchsius, no art can be
made, by reason of their uncertainty, casualty, and
multitude; so called "not necessary" because according to
Fernelius, "they may be avoided, and used without necessity."
Many of these accidental causes, which I shall entreat of
here, might have well been reduced to the former, because
they cannot be avoided, but fatally happen to us, though
accidentally, and unawares, at some time or other: the rest
are contingent and inevitable, and more properly inserted in
this rank of causes. To reckon up all is a thing impossible;
of some therefore most remarkable of these contingent causes
which produce melancholy, I will briefly speak and in their
order.

From a child's nativity, the first ill accident that can
likely befall him in this kind is a bad nurse, by whose means
alone he may be tainted with this malady from his cradle,
Aulus Gellius l. 12. c. 1. brings in Phavorinus, that
eloquent philosopher, proving this at large, "that there is
the same virtue and property in the milk as in the seed, and
not in men alone, but in all other creatures; he gives
instance in a kid and lamb, if either of them suck of the
other's milk, the lamb of the goat's, or the kid of the
ewe's, the wool of the one will he hard, and the hair of the
other soft." Giraldus Cambrensis Itinerar. Cambriae, l. 1. c.
2. confirms this by a notable example which happened in his
time. A sow-pig by chance sucked a brach, and when he was
grown, "would miraculously hunt all manner of deer, and that
as well, or rather better, than any ordinary hound." His
conclusion is, "that men and beasts participate of her nature
and conditions by whose milk they are fed." Phavorinus urges
it further, and demonstrates it more evidently, that if a
nurse be "misshapen, unchaste, dishonest, impudent, cruel, or
the like, the child that sucks upon her breast will be so
too;" all other affections of the mind and diseases are
almost ingrafted, as it were, and imprinted into the
temperature of the infant, by the nurse's milk; as pox,
leprosy, melancholy, &c. Cato for some such reason would make
his servants' children suck upon his wife's breast, because
by that means they would love him and his the better, and in
all likelihood agree with them. A more evident example that
the minds are altered by milk cannot be given, than that of
Dion, which he relates of Caligula's cruelty; it could
neither be imputed to father nor mother, but to his cruel
nurse alone, that anointed her paps with blood still when he
sucked, which made him such a murderer, and to express her
cruelty to a hair: and that of Tiberius, who was a common
drunkard, because his nurse was such a one. Et si delira
fuerit (one observes) infantulum delirum faciet, if she be a
fool or dolt, the child she nurseth will take after her, or
otherwise be misaffected; which Franciscus Barbarus, l. 2. c.
ult. de re uxoria, proves at full, and Ant. Guivarra. lib. 2.
de Marco Aurelio: the child will surely participate. For
bodily sickness there is no doubt to be made. Titus,
Vespasian's son, was therefore sickly, because the nurse was
so, Lampridius. And if we may believe physicians, many times
children catch the pox from a bad nurse, Botaldus, cap. 61.
de lue vener. Besides evil attendance, negligence, and many
gross inconveniences, which are incident to nurses, much
danger may so come to the child. For these causes Aristotle,
Polit. lib. 7. c. 17. Phavorinus and Marcus Aurelius would
not have a child put to nurse at all, but every mother to
bring up her own, of what condition soever she be; for a
sound and able mother to put out her child to nurse, is
naturae intemperies, so Guatso calls it, 'tis fit therefore
she should be nurse herself; the mother will be more careful,
loving, and attendant, than any servile woman, or such hired
creatures; this all the world ackowledgeth, convenientissimum
est (as Rod. a Castro de nat. mulierum, lib. 4. c. 12. in
many words confesseth) matrem ipsam lactare infantem, "It is
most fit that the mother should suckle her own infant"-- who
denies that it should be so?-- and which some women most
curiously observe; amongst the rest, that queen of France, a
Spaniard by birth, that was so precise and zealous in this
behalf, that when in her absence a strange nurse had suckled
her child, she was never quiet till she had made the infant
vomit it up again. But she was too jealous. If it be so, as
many times it is, they must be put forth, the mother be not
fit or well able to be a nurse, I would then advise such
mothers, as Plutarch doth in his book de liberis educandis,
and S. Hierom, li. 2. epist. 27. Laetae de institut. fil.
Magninus part. 2. Reg. sanit. cap. 7. and the said Rodericus, 
that they make choice of a sound woman, of a good complexion,
honest, free from bodily diseases, if it be possible, all
passions and perturbations of the mind, as sorrow, fear,
grief, folly,  melancholy. For such passions corrupt the
milk, and alter the temperature of the child, which now being
Udum et molle lutum, "a moist and soft clay" is easily
seasoned and perverted. And if such a nurse may be found out,
that will be diligent and careful withal, let Phavorinus and
M. Aurelius plead how they can against it, I had rather
accept of her in some cases than the mother herself and which
Bonacialus the physician, Nic. Biesius the politician, lib.
4. de repub. cap. 8. approves, "Some nurses are much to be
preferred to some mothers." For why may not the mother be
naught, peevish drunken flirt, a waspish choleric slut, a
crazed piece, a fool (as many mothers are), unsound, as soon
as the nurse? There is more choice of nurses than mothers;
and therefore except the mother be most virtuous, staid, a
woman of excellent good parts, and of a sound complexion, I
would have all children in such cases committed to discreet
strangers. And 'tis the only way; as by marriage they are
ingrafted to other families to alter the breed, or if 
anything be amiss in the mother, as Ludovicus Mercatus
contends, Tom. 2. lib. de morb. haered. to prevent diseases
and future maladies, to correct and qualify the child's ill-
disposed temperature, which he had from his parents. This is
an excellent remedy, if good choice be made of such a nurse.



SUBSECT. II.-- Education a Cause of Melancholy.


EDUCATION, of these accidental causes of Melancholy, may
justly challenge the next place, for if a man escape a bad
nurse, he may be undone by evil bringing up. Jason Pratensis
puts this of education for a principal cause; bad parents,
step-mothers, tutors, masters, teachers, too rigorous, too
severe, too remiss or indulgent on the other side, are often
fountains and fartherers of this disease. Parents and such as
have the tuition and oversight of children, offend many times
in that they are too stern, always threatening, chiding,
brawling, whipping, or striking; by means of which their poor
children are so disheartened and cowed, that they never after
have any courage, a merry hour in their lives, or take
pleasure in any thing. There is a great moderation to be had
in such thngs, as matters of so great moment to the making or
marring of a child. Some fright their children with beggars,
bugbears, and hobgoblins, if they cry, or be otherwise
unruly: but they are much to blame in it, many times, saith
Lavater, de spectris, part 1. cap. 5. ex metu in morbos
graves incidunt et noctu dormientes clamant, for fear they
fall into many diseases, and cry out in their sleep, and are
much the worse for it all their lives: these things ought not
at all, or to be sparingly done, and upon just occasion.
Tyrannical, impatient, hare-brained schoolmasters, aridi
magistri, so Fabius terms them Ajaces flagelliferi, are in
this kind as bad as hangmen and executioners, they make many
children endure a martyrdom all the while they are at school,
with bad diet, if they board in their houses, too much
severity and ill-usage, they quite pervert their temperature
of body and mind: still chiding, railing, frowning, lashing,
tasking, keeping, that they are fracti animis, moped many
times weary of their lives, nimia severitate deficiunt et
desperant, and think no slavery in the world (as once I did
myself) like to that of a grammar scholar. Praeceptorum
ineptiis discruciantur ingenia puerorum, (The pupil's
faculties are perverted by the indiscretion of the master)
saith Erasmus, they tremble at his voice, looks, coming in.
St. Austin, in the first book of his confess. et 4. ca. calls
this schooling meticulosam necessitatem, and elsewhere a
martyrdom, and confesseth of himself; how cruelly he was
tortured in mind for learning Greek, nulla verba noveram, et
saevis terroribus et poenis, ut nossem, instabatur mihi
vehementer, I knew nothing, and with cruel terrors and
punishment I was daily compelled. Beza complains in like case
of a rigorous schoolmaster in Paris, that made him by his
continual thunder and threats once in a mind to drown
himself; had he not met by the way with an uncle of his that
vindicated him from that misery for the time, by taking him
to his house. Trincavellius, lib. 1. consil. 16. had a
patient nineteen years of age, extremely melancholy, ob
nimium studium, Tarvitii et preceptoris minas, by reason of
overmuch study, and his tutor's threats. Many masters are
hard-hearted, and bitter to their servants, and by means do
so deject, with terrible speeches and hard usage so crucify
them, that they become desperate, and can never be recalled.

Others again, in that opposite extreme, do as great harm by
their too much remissness, they give them no bringing up, no
calling to busy themselves about, or to live in, teach them
no trade, or set them in any good course; by means of which
their servants, children, scholars, are carried away with
that stream of drunkenness, idleness, gaming, and many such
irregular courses, that in the end they rue it, curse their
parents, and mischief themselves. Too much indulgence causeth
the like, inepta patris lenitas et facilitas prava, when as
Mitio-like, with too much liberty and too great allowance,
they feed their children's humours, let them revel, wench,
riot, swagger, and do what they will themselves, and then
punish them with noise of musicians;

"Obsonet, potet, oleat unguenta de meo:
Amat? dabitur a me argentum ubi erit commodum.
Fores effregit? restituentur: descidit
Vestem? reasarcietur.-- Faciat quod lubet.
Sumat, consumat, perdat, decretum est pati."
(Let him feast, drink, perfume himself at my expense: If he
be in love, I shall supply him with money. Has he broken in
the gates? they shall be repaired. Has he torn his garments?
they shall be replaced. Let him do what he pleases, take,
spend, waste, I am resolved to submit.)

But as Demeo told him, tu illum corrumpi sinis, your lenity
will be his undoing, praevidere videor jam diem ilium, quum
hic egens profugiet aliquo militatum, I foresee his ruin. So
parents often err, many fond mothers especially, dote so much
upon their children, like Aesop's ape, till in the end they
crush them to death, Corporum nutrices animarum novercae,
pampering up their bodies to the undoing of their souls; they
will not let them be corrected or controlled, but still
soothed up in every thing they do, that in conclusion "they
bring sorrow, shame, heaviness to their parents (Ecclus. cap.
xxx. 8, 9.) become wanton, stubborn, wilful, and disobedient;
rude, untaught, headstrong, incorrigible, and graceless;"
"they love them so foolishly," saith Cardan, "that they
rather seem to hate them, bringing them not up to virtue but
injury, not to learning but to riot, not to sober life and
conversation, but to all pleasure and licentious behaviour."
Who is he of so little experience that knows not this of
Fabius to be true! "Education is another nature, altering the
mind and will, and I would to God (saith he) we ourselves did
not spoil our children's manners, by our overmuch cockering
and nice education, and weaken the strength of their bodies
and minds, that causeth custom, custom nature," &c. For these
causes Plutarch in his book de lib. educ. and Hierom, epist.
lib 1. epist. 17. to Laeta de institut. filiae, gives a most
especial charge to all parents, and many good cautions about
bringing up of children, that they be not committed to
indiscreet, passionate, bedlam tutors, light, giddy-headed,
or covetous persons, and spare for no cost, that they may be
well nurtured and taught, it being a matter of so great
consequence. For such parents as do otherwise, Plutarch
esteems of them "that are more careful of their shoes than of
their feet," that rate their wealth above their children. And
he, saith Cardan, "that leaves his son to a covetous
schoolmaster to be informed, or to a close Abbey to fast and
learn wisdom together, doth no other, than that he be a
learned fool, or a sickly wise man."



SUBSECT. III.-- Terrors and Affrights, Causes of Melancholy.


TULLY, in the fourth of his Tusculans, distinguishes these
terrors which arise from the apprehension of some terrible
object heard or seen, from other fears, and so doth
Patritius, lib. 5. Tit. 4. de regis institut. Of all fears
they are most pernicious and violent, and so suddenly alter
the whole temperature of the body, move the soul and spirits,
strike such a deep impression, that the parties can never be
recovered, causing more grievous and fiercer melancholy, as
Felix Plater, c. 3. dementis alienat. speaks out of his
experience, than any inward cause whatsoever: and imprints
itself so forcibly in the spirits, brain, humours, that if
all the mass of blood were let out of the body, it could
hardly be extracted. This horrible kind of melancholy (for so
he terms it) had been often brought before him, "and troubles
and affrights commonly men and women, young and old of all
sorts." Hercules de Saxonia calls this kind of melancholy (ab
agitatione spirituum) by a peculiar name, it comes from the
agitation, motion, contraction, dilatation of spirits, not
from any distemperature of humours, and produceth strong
effects. This terror is most usually caused, as Plutarch will
have, from some imminent danger, when a terrible object is at
hand, heard, seen, or conceived, "truly appearing, or in a
dream:" and many times the more sudden the accident, it is
the more violent.

"Stat terror animis, et cor attonitum salit,
Pavidumque trepidis palpitat venis jecur."
"Their souls affright, their heart amazed quakes,
The trembling liver pants i' th' veins, and aches."

Arthemedorus the grammarian lost his wits by the unexpected
sight of a crocodile, Laurentius, 7. de melan. The massacre
at Lyons, 1572, in the reign of Charles IX., was so terrible
and fearful, that many ran mad, some died, great-bellied
women were brought to bed before their time, generally all
affrighted aghast. Many lose their wits "by the sudden sight
of some spectrum or devil, a thing very common in all ages,"
saith Lavater, part 1. cap. 9. as Orestes did at the sight of
the Furies, which appeared to him in black (as Pausanias
records). The Greeks call them µ??µ????e?a, [mozmolycheia]
which so terrify their souls, or if they be but affrighted by
some counterfeit devils in jest,

"-- ut pueri trepidant, atque omnia caecis
In tenebris metuunt --"

as children in the dark conceive hobgoblins, and are so
afraid, they are the worse for it all their lives. Some by
sudden fires, earthquakes, inundations, or any such dismal
objects: Themison the physician fell into a hydrophobia, by
seeing one sick of that disease: (Dioscurides l. 6. c. 33.)
or by the sight of a monster, a carcase, they are disquieted
many months following, and cannot endure the room where a
corpse hath been, for a world would not be alone with a dead
man, or lie in that bed many years after in which a man hath
died. At Basel many little children in the spring time went
to gather flowers in a meadow at the town's end, where a
malefactor hung in gibbets; all gazing at it, one by chance
flung a stone, and made it stir, by which accident, the
children affrighted ran away; one slower than the rest,
looking back, and seeing the stirred carcase wag towards her,
cried out it came after, and was so terribly affrighted, that
for many days she could not rest, eat, or sleep, she could
not be pacified, but melancholy, died. In the same town
another child, beyond the Rhine, saw a grave opened, and upon
the sight of a carcase, was so troubled in mind that she
could not be comforted, but a little after departed, and was
buried up. Platerus, observat. l. 1, a gentlewoman of the
same city saw a fat hog cut up, when the entrails were
opened, and a noisome savour offended her nose, she much
misliked, and would not longer abide: a physician in presence
told her, as that hog, so was she, full of filthy excrements,
and aggravated the matter by some other loathsome instances,
insomuch this nice gentlewoman apprehended it so deeply, that
she fell forthwith a-vomiting, was so mightily distempered in
mind and body, that with all his art and persuasions, for
some months after, he could not restore her to herself again,
she could not forget it, or remove the object out of her
sight, Idem. Many cannot endure to see a wound opened, but
they are offended: a man executed, or labour of any fearful
disease, as possession, apoplexies, one bewitched; or if they
read by chance of some terrible thing, the symptoms alone of
such a disease, or that which they dislike, they are
instantly troubled in mind, aghast, ready to apply it to
themselves, they are as much disquieted as if they had seen
it, or were so affected themselves. Hecatas sibi videntur
somniare, they dream and continually think of it. As
lamentable effects are caused by such terrible objects heard,
read, or seen, auditus maximos motus in corpora facit, as
Plutarch holds, no sense makes greater alteration of body and
mind: sudden speech sometimes, unexpected news, be they good
or bad, praevisa minus oratio, will move as much, animum
obruere, et de sede sua dejicere, as a philosopher observes,
will take away our sleep and appetite, disturb and quite
overturn us. Let them bear witness that have heard those
tragical alarms, outcries, hideous noises, which are many
times suddenly heard in the dead of the night by irruption of
enemies and accidental fires, &c., those panic fears, which
often drive men out of their wits, bereave them of sense,
understanding and all, some for a time, some for their whole
lives, they never recover it. The Midianites were so
affrighted by Gideon's soldiers, they breaking but every one
a pitcher; and Hannibal's army by such a panic fear was
discomfited at the walls of Rome. Augusta Livia hearing a few
tragical verses recited out of Virgil, Tu Marcellus eris,
&c., fell down dead in a swoon. Edinus king of Denmark, by a
sudden sound which he heard, "was turned into fury with all
his men," Crauzius, l. 5, Dan. hist. et Alexander ab
Alexandro l. 3. c. 5. Amatus Lusitanus had a patient, that by
reason of bad tidings became epilepticus, cen. 2. cura 90,
Cardan subtil. l. 18, saw one that lost his wits by mistaking
of an echo. If one sense alone can cause such violent
commotions of the mind, what may we think when hearing,
sight, and those other senses are all troubled at once? as by
some earthquakes, thunder, lightning, tempest; &c. At Bologna
in Italy, Anno 1504, there was such a fearful earthquake
about eleven o'clock in the night (as Beroaldus, in his book
de terrae motu, hath commended to posterity) that all the
city trembled, the people thought the world was at an end,
actum de mortalibus, such a fearful noise, it made such a
detestable smell, the inhabitants were infinitely affrighted,
and some ran mad. Audi rem atrocem, at annalibus memorandam
(mine author adds), hear a strange story, and worthy to be 
chronicled: I had a servant at the same time called Fulco
Argelanus, a bold and proper man, so grievously terrified
with it, that he was first melancholy, after doted, at last
mad, and made away himself: At Fuscinum in Japona "there was
such an earthquake, and darkness on a sudden, that many men
were offended with headache, many overwhelmed with sorrow and
melancholy. At Meacum whole streets and goodly palaces were
overturned at the same time, and there was such a hideous
noise withal, like thunder, and filthy smell, that their hair
started for fear, and their hearts quaked, men and beasts
were incredibly terrified. In Sacai, another city, the same
earthquake was terrible unto them, that many were bereft of
their senses; and others by that horrible spectacle so much
amazed, that they knew not what they did."  Blasius, a
Christian, the reporter of the news,was so affrighted for his
part, that though it were two months after, he was scarce his
own man, neither could he drive the remembrance of it out of
his mind. Many time, some years following, they will tremble
afresh at the remembrance or conceit of such a terrible
object, even all their lives long, if mention be made of it.
Cornelius Agrippa relates out of Gulielmus Parisiensis, a
story of one, that after a distasteful purge which a
physician had prescribed unto him, was so much moved, "that
at the very sight of physic he would be distempered," though
he never so much as smelled to it, the box of physic long
after would give him a purge; nay, the very remembrance of it
did effect it; "like travellers and seamen," saith Plutarch,
"that when they have been sanded, or dashed on a rock, for
ever after fear not that mischance only, but all such dangers
whatsoever."



SUBSECT. IV.-- Scoffs, Calumnies, bitter Jests, how they
cause Melancholy


IT is an old saying, "A blow with a word strikes deeper than
a blow with a sword" and many men are as much galled with a
calumny, a scurrilous and bitter jest, a libel, a pasquil,
satire, apologue, epigram, stage-play or the like, as with
any misfortune whatsoever. Princes and potentates that are
otherwise happy, and have all at command, secure and free,
quibus potentia sceleris impunitatem fecit, are grievously
vexed with these pasquilling libels, and satires: they fear a
railing Aretine more than an enemy in the field, which made
most princes of his time (as some relate) "allow him a
liberal pension, that he should not tax them in his satires."
The gods had their Momus, Homer his Zoilus, Achilles his
Thersites, Philip his Demades: the Caesars themselves in Rome
were commonly taunted. There was never wanting a Petronius, a
Lucian in those times, nor will be a Rabelais, an Euphormio,
a Boccalinus in ours. Adran the sixth pope was so highly
offended, and grievously vexed with Pasquillers at Rome, he
gave command that his statue should be demolished and burned,
the ashes flung into the river Tiber, and had done it
forthwith, had not Lodovicus Suessanus, a facete companion,
dissuaded him to the contrary, by telling him, that Pasquil's
ashes would turn to frogs in the bottom of the river, and
croak worse and louder than before, -- genus irritabile
vatum, and therefore Socrates in Plato adviseth all his
friends, "that respect their credits, to stand in awe of
poets, for they are terrible fellows, can praise and
dispraise as they see cause." Hinc quam sit calamus saevior
ense, patet. The prophet David complains, Psalm cxxiii. 4.
"that his soul was full of the mocking of the wealthy, and of
the despitefulness of the proud," and Psalm lv. 4. "for the
voice of the wicked, &c., and their hate: his heart trembled
within him, and the terrors of death came upon him; fear and
horrible fear," &c., and Psalm lxix. 20. "Rebuke hath broken
my heart, and I am full of heaviness." Who hath not like
cause to complain, and is not so troubled, that shall fall
into the mouths of such men? for many are of so petulant a
spleen; and have that figure Sarcasmus so often in their
mouths, so bitter, so foolish, as Baltasar Castilio notes of
them, that "they cannot speak, but they must bite;" they had
rather lose a friend than a jest; and what company soever
they come in, they will be scoffing, insulting over their
inferiors, especially over such as any way depend upon them,
humouring, misusing, or putting gulleries on some or other
till they have made by their humouring or gulling ex stulto
insanum, a mope or a noddy, and all to make themselves merry:

"-- dummodo risum
Excutiat sibi; non hic cuiquam pareit amico;"
(Hor. ser. lib. 2 sat. 4 "Provided he can only excite
laughter, he spares not his best friend.")

Friends, neuters, enemies, all are as one, to make a fool a
madman, is their sport, and they have no greater felicity
than to scoff and deride others; they must sacrifice to the
god of laughter, with them in Apuleius, once a day, or else
they shall be melancholy themselves; they care not how they
grind and misuse others, so they may exhilarate their own
persons. Their wits indeed serve them to that sole purpose,
to make sport, to break a scurrile jest, which is levissimus
ingenii fructus, the froth of wit, as Tully holds, and for
this they are often applauded, in all other discourse, dry,
barren, stramineous, dull and heavy, here lies their genius,
in this they alone excel, please themselves and others. Leo
Decimus, that scoffing pope, as Jovius hath registered in the
Fourth book of his life, took an extraordinary delight in
humouring of silly fellows, and to put gulleries upon them,
by commending some, persuading others to this or that; he
made ex stolidis stultissimos, et maxime ridiculos, ex
stultis insanos; soft fellows, stark noddies; and such as
were foolish, quite mad before he left them. One memorable
example he recites there, of Tarascomus of Parma, a musician
that was so humoured by Leo Decimus, and Bibiena his second
in this business, that he thought himself to be a man of most
excellent skill (who was indeed a ninny), they "made him set
foolish songs, and invent new ridiculous precepts, which they
did highly commend," as to tie his arm that played on the
lute, to make him strike a sweeter stroke, "and to pull down
the Arras hangings, because the voice would be clearer, by
reason of the reverberation of the wall." In the like manner
they persuaded one Baraballius of Caieta, that he was as good
a poet as Petrarch; would have him to be made a laureate
poet, and invite all his friends to his instalment; and had
so possessed the poor man with a conceit of his excellent
poetry, that when some of his more discreet friends told him
of his folly, he was very angry with them, and said "they
envied his honour, and prosperity:" it was strange (saith
Jovius) to see an old man of 60 years, a venerable and grave
old man, so gulled. But what cannot such scoffers do,
especially if they find a soft creature, on whom they may
work? nay, to say truth, who is so wise, or so discreet, that
may not be humoured in this kind, especially if some
excellent wits shall set upon him; he that made others, if he
were so humoured, would be as mad himself as much grieved and
tormented; he might cry with him in the comedy, Proh Jupiter,
tu homo me adigas ad insaniam. For all is in these things as
they are taken; if he be a silly soul, and do not perceive
it, 'tis well, he may haply make others sport, and be no whit
troubled himself; but if he be apprehensive of his folly, and
take it to heart, then it torments him worse than any lash: a
bitter jest, a slander, a calumny, pierceth deeper than any
loss, danger, bodily pain, or injury whatsoever; laviter enim
volat (it flies swiftly), as Bernard of an arrow, sed
graviter vulnerat (but wounds deeply), especially if it shall
proceed from a virulent tongue, "it cuts (saith David) like a
two-edged sword. They shoot bitter words as arrows," Psalm
lxiv. 3. "And they smote with their tongues", Jer. xviii. 18.
and that so hard, that they leave an incurable wound behind
them. Many men are undone by this means, moped, and so
dejected, that they are never to be recovered; and of all
other men living, those which are actually melancholy, or
inclined to it, are most sensible (as being suspicious,
choleric, apt to mistake) and impatient of an injury in that
kind: they aggravate, and so meditate continually of it, that
it is a perpetual corrosive, not to be removed till time wear
it out Although they peradventure that so scoff, do it alone
in mirth and merriment, and hold it optimum aliena frui
insania, an excellent thing to enjoy another man's madness;
yet they must know, that it is a mortal sin (as Thomas
holds), and as the prophet David denounceth, "they that use
it, shall never dwell in God's tabernacle."

Such scurrilous jests, flouts, and sarcasms, therefore, ought
not at all to be used; especially to our betters, to those
that are in misery, or any way distressed: for to such,
aerumnarum incrementa sunt, they multiply grief; and as he
perceived, in multis pudor, in multis iracundia, &c., many
are ashamed, many vexed, angered, and there is no greater
cause or furtherer of melancholy. Martin Cromerus, in the
Sixth book of his history, hath a pretty story to this
purpose, of Uladislaus, the second king of Poland, and Peter
Dunnius, earl of Shrine; they had been hunting late, and were
enforced to lodge in a poor cottage. When they went to bed,
Uladislaus told the earl in jest, that his wife lay softer
with the abbot of Shrine; he not able to contain, replied, Et
tua cum Dabesso, and yours with Dabessus, a gallant young
gentleman in the court, whom Christina the queen loved.
Tetigit id dictum Principis animum, these words of his so
galled the prince, that he was long after tristis et
cogiabundus, very sad and melancholy for many months; but
they were the earl's utter undoing: for when Christina heard
of it, she persecuted him to death. Sophia the empress,
Justinian's wife, broke a bitter jest upon Narsetes the
eunuch, a famous captain then disquieted for an overthrow
which he lately had: that he was fitter for a distaff and to
keep women company, than to wield a sword, or to be general
of an army: but it cost her dear, for he so far distasted it,
that he went forthwith to the adverse part, much troubled in
his thoughts, caused the Lombards to rebel, and thence
procured many miseries to the commonwealth. Tiberius the
emperor withheld a legacy from the people of Rome, which his
predecessor Augustus had lately given, and perceiving a
fellow round a dead corse in the ear, would needs know
wherefore he did so; the fellow replied, that he wished the
departed soul to signify to Augustus, the commons of Rome
were yet unpaid: for this bitter jest the emperor caused him
forthwith to be slain, and carry the news himself. For this
reason, all those that otherwise approve of jests in some
cases, and facete companions, (as who doth not?) let them
laugh and be merry, rumpantur et ilia Codro, 'tis laudable
and fit, those yet will by no means admit them in their
companies, that are any way inclined to this malady; non
jocandum cum iis qui miseri sunt, et aerumnosi, no jesting
with a discontented person, 'Tis Castilio's caveat, Jo.
Pontanus, and Galateus, and every good man's.

Play with me, but hurt me not:
Jest with me, but shame me not.

Comitas is a virtue between rusticity and scurrility, two
extremes, as affability is between flattery and contention,
it must not exceed; but be still accompanied with that
aß?ßae?a [ablabeia] or innocency, quae nemini nocet, omnem
injuriae oblationem abhorrens, hurts no man, abhors all offer
of injury. Though a man be liable to such a jest or obloquy,
have been overseen, or committed a foul fact, yet it is no
good manners or humanity to upbraid, to hit him in the teeth
with his offence, or to scoff at such a one; 'tis an old
axiom, turpis in reum omnis exprobratio (every reproach
uttered against one already condemned, is mean-spirited). I
speak not of such as generally tax vice, Barclay, Gentilis,
Erasmus, Agrippa, Fishcartus, &c., the Varronists and Lucians
of our time, satirists, epigrammatists, comedians,
apologists, &c., but such as personate, rail, scoff,
calumniate, perstringe by name, or in presence offend;

"Ludit qui stolida procacitate,
Non est Sestius ille sed caballus;"

'Tis horse-play this, and those jests (as he saith) "are no
better than injuries," biting jests, mordentes et aculeati,
they are poisoned jests, leave a sting behind them, and ought
not to be used.

"Set not thy foot to make the blind to fall;
Nor wilfully offend thy weaker brother:
Nor wound the dead with thy tongues' bitter gall,
Neither rejoice thou in the fall of other."

If these rules could be kept, we should have much more ease
and quietness then we have, less melancholy; whereas, on the
contrary, we study to misuse each other, how to sting and
gall, like two fighting boors, bending all our force and wit,
friends, fortune, to crucify one another's souls; by means of
which, there is little content and charity, much virulency,
hatred, malice, and disquietness among us.



SUBSECT. V.-- Loss of Liberty, Servitude, Imprisonment, how
they cause Melancholy.


To this catalogue of causes, I may well annex loss of
liberty, servitude, or imprisonment, which to some persons is
as great a torture as any of the rest. Though they have all
things convenient, sumptuous houses to their use, fair walks
and gardens, delicious bowers, galleries, good fare and diet,
and all things correspondent, yet they are not content,
because they are confined, may not come and go at their
pleasure, have and do what they will, but live aliena quadra,
at another man's table and command. As it is in meats so it
is in all other things, places, societies, sports; let them
be never so pleasant, commodious, wholesome, so good; yet
omnium rerum est satietas, there is a loathing satiety of all
things. The children of Israel were tired with manna, it is
irksome to them so to live, as to a bird in a cage, or a dog
in his kennel, they are weary of it. They are happy, it is
true, and have all things, to another man's judgment, that
heart can wish, or that they themselves can desire, bona si
sua norint: yet they loathe it, and are tired with the
present: Est natura hominum novitatis avida; men's nature is
still desirous of news, variety, delights; and our wandering
affections are so irregular in this kind, that they must
change, though it must be to the worst. Bachelors must be
married, and married men would be bachelors; they do not love
their own wives, though otherwise fair, wise, virtuous, and
well qualified, because they are theirs; our present estate
is still the worst, we cannot endure one course of life long,
et quod modo voverat, odit, one calling long, esse in honore
juvat, mox displicet; one place long, Romae Tybur amo,
ventosus Tybure Romam, that which we earnestly sought, we now
contemn. Hoc quosdam agit ad mortem (saith  Seneca) quod
proposita saepe mutando in eadem revolvuntur, et non
relinquunt novitati locum: Fastidio caepit esse vita, et
ipsus mundus, et subit illud rapidissimarum deliciarum,
Quousque eadem? this alone kills many a man, that they are
tied to the same still, as a horse in a mill, a dog in a
wheel, they run round, without alteration or news, their life
groweth odious, the world loathsome, and that which crosseth
their furious delights, what? still the same? Marcus Aurelius
and Solomon, that had experience of all worldly delights and
pleasure, confessed as much of themselves; what they most
desired, was tedious at last, and that their lust could never
be satisfied, all was vanity and affliction of mind.

Now if it be death itself another hell, to be glutted with
one kind of sport, dieted with one dish, tied to one place;
though they have all things otherwise as they can desire, and
are in heaven to another man's opinion, what misery and
discontent shall they have, that live in slavery, or in
prison itself? Quod tristius morte, in servitute vivendum, as
Hermolaus told Alexander in Curtius, worse than death is
bondage: hoc animo scito omnes fortes ut mortem servituti
anteponant, All brave men at arms (Tully holds) are so
affected. Equidem ego is sum qui servitutem extremum omnium
malorum esse arbitror: I am he (saith Boterus) that account
servitude the extremity of misery. And what calamity do they
endure, that live with those hard taskmasters, in gold mines
(like those 30,000 lndian slaves at Potosi, in Peru), tin-
mines, lead-mines, stone-quarries, coal-pits, like so many
mouldwarps under ground, condemned to the galleys, to
perpetual drudgery, hunger, thirst, and stripes, without all
hope of delivery. How are those women in Turkey affected,
that most part of the year come not abroad; those Italian and
Spanish dames, that are mewed up like hawks, and locked up by
their jealous husbands? how tedious is it to them that live
in stoves and caves half a year together? as in Iceland,
Muscovy, or under the pole itself where they have six months'
perpetual night. Nay, what misery and discontent do they
endure, that are in prison? They want all those six non-
natural things at once, good air, good diet, exercise,
company, sleep, rest, ease, &c., that are bound in chains all
day long, suffer hunger, and (as Lucian describes it) "must
abide that filthy stink, and rattling of chains, howlings,
pitiful outcries, that prisoners usually make; these things
are not only troublesome, but intolerable." They lie nastily
among toads and frogs in a dark dungeon, in their own dung;
in pain of body, in pain of soul, as Joseph did, Psalm cv.
18, "They hurt his feet in the stocks, the iron entered his
soul." They live solitary, alone, sequestered from all
company but heart-eating melancholy; and for want of meat,
must eat that bread of affliction, prey upon themselves. Well
might Arculanus put long imprisonment for a cause, especially
to such as have lived jovially, in all sensuality and lust,
upon a sudden are estranged and debarred from all manner of
pleasures: as were Huniades, Edward, and Richard II.,
Valerian the Emperor, Bajazet the Turk. If it be irksome to
miss our ordinary companions and repast for once a day, or an
hour, what shall it be to lose them for ever? If it be so
great a delight to live at liberty, and to enjoy that variety
of objects the world affords; what misery and discontent must
it needs bring to him, that shall now be cast headlong into
that Spanish inquisition, to fall from heaven to hell, to be
cubbed up upon a sudden, how shall he be perplexed, what
shall become of him? Robert Duke of Normandy being imprisoned
by his youngest brother Henry I., ab illo die inconsolabili
dolore in carcere contabuit, saith Matthew Paris, from that
day forward pined away with grief. Jugurtha that generous
captain, "brought to Rome in triumph, and after imprisoned,
through anguish of his soul, and melancholy, died." Roger,
Bishop of Salisbury, the second man from King Stephen, (he
that built that famous castle of Devizes in Wiltshire), was
so tortured in prison with hunger, and all those calamities
accompanying such men, ut vivere noluerit, non nescierit, he
would not live, and could not die, between fear of death, and
torments of life. Francis, King of France, was taken prisoner
by Charles V., ad mortem fere melancholicus, saith
Guicciardini, melancholy almost to death, and that in an
instant. But this is as clear as the sun, and needs no
further illustration.



SUBSECT. VI.-- Poverty and Want, Causes of Melancholy.


POVERTY and want are so violent oppugners, so unwelcome
guests, so much abhorred of all men, that I may not omit to
speak of them apart. Poverty, although (if considered aught,
to a wise, understanding, truly regenerate, and contented
man) it be donum Dei, a blessed estate, the way to heaven, as
Chrysostom calls it, God's gift, the mother of modesty, and
much to be preferred before riches (as shall be shown in his
place), yet as it is esteemed in the world's censure, it is a
most odious calling, vile and base, a severe torture, summum
scelus, a most intolerable burden; we shun it all, cane pejus
et angue (worse than a dog or a snake), we abhor the name of
it, Paupertas fugitur, totoque arcessitur orbe, as being the
fountain of all other miseries, cares, woes, labours, and
grievances whatsoever. To avoid which, we will take any
pains,-- extremos currit mercator ad Indos, we will leave no
haven, no coast, no creek of the world unsearched, though it
be to the hazard of our lives; we will dive to the bottom of
the sea, to the bowels of the earth, five, six, seven, eight,
nine hundred fathom deep, through all five zones, and both
extremes of heat and cold: we will turn parasites and slaves,
prostitute ourselves, swear and lie, damn our bodies and
souls, forsake God, abjure religion, steal, rob, murder,
rather than endure this insufferable yoke of poverty, which
doth so tyrannise, crucify, and generally depress us.

For look into the world, and you shall see men most part 
esteemed according to their means, and happy as they are
rich: Ubique tanti quisque quantum habuit fuit. If he be
likely to thrive, and in the way of preferment, who but he?
In the vulgar opinion, if a man be wealthy, no matter how he
gets it, of what parentage, how qualified, how virtuously
endowed, or villainously inclined; let him be a bawd, a
gripe, an usurer, a villain, a pagan, a barbarian, a wretch,
Lucian's tyrant, "on whom you may look with less security
than on the sun;" so that he be rich (and liberal withal) he
shall be honoured, admired, adored, reverenced, and highly
magnified. "The rich is had in reputation because of his
goods," Eccl. x. 31. He shall be befriended: "for riches
gather many friends," Prov. xix. 4.-- multos numerabit
amicos, all happiness ebbs and flows with his money. He shall
be accounted a gracious lord, a Mecaenas, a benefactor, a
wise, discreet, a proper, a valiant, a fortunate man, of a
generous spirit, Pullus Jovis, et gallinus filius albae: a
hopeful, a good man, a virtuous, honest man. Quando ego te
Junonium puerum et matris partum vere aureum, as Tully said
of Octavianus, while he was adopted Caesar, and an heir
apparent of so great a monarchy, he was a golden child. All
honour, offices, applause, grand titles, and turgent epithets
are put upon him, omnes omnia bona dicere; all men's eyes are
upon him, God bless his good worship, his honour; every man
speaks well of him, every man presents him, seeks and sues to
him for his love, favour and protection, to serve him, belong
unto him, every man riseth to him, as to Themistocles in the
Olympics, if he speak, as of Herod, Vox Dei, non hominis, the
voice of God, not of man. All the graces, Veneres, pleasures,
elegances attend him, golden fortune accompanies and lodgeth
with him; and as to those Roman emperors, is placed in his
chamber.

"-- Secura naviget aura
Fortunamque suo temperet arbitrio:"

he may sail as he will himself; and temper his estate at his
pleasure, jovial days, splendour and magnificence, sweet
music, dainty fare, the good things, and fat of the land,
fine clothes, rich attires, soft beds, down pillows are at
his command, all the world labours for him, thousands of
artificers are his slaves to drudge for him, run, ride, and
post for him: Divines (for Pythia Philippisat), lawyers,
physicians, philosophers, scholars are his, wholly devote to
his service. Every man seeks his acquaintance, his kindred,
to match with him, though he be an oaf; a ninny, a monster, a
goosecap, uxorem ducat Danaën (He may have Danae to wife),
when and whom he will, hunc optant generum Rex et Regina --
he is an excellent match for my son, my daughter, my niece,
&c. Quicquid calcaverit hic, Rosa fiet, let him go whither he
will, trumpets sound, bells ring, &c., all happiness attends
him, every man is willing to entertain him, he sups in Apollo
wheresoever he comes; what preparation is made for his
entertainment, fish and fowl, spices and perfumes, all that
sea and land affords. What cookery, masking, mirth to
exhilarate his person!

"Da Trebio, pone ad Trebium, vis frater ab illis
Ilibus?--"

What dish will your good worship eat of?

"-- dulcia poma,
Et quoscunque feret cultus tibi fundus honores,
Ante Larem, gustet venerabilior Lare dives."
"Sweet apples, and whate'er thy fields afford.
Before thy Gods be served, let serve thy Lord."

What sport will your honour have? hawking, hunting, fishing,
fowling, bulls, bears, cards, dice, cocks, players, tumblers,
fiddlers, jesters, &c., they are at your good worship's
command. Fair houses, gardens, orchards, terraces, galleries,
cabinets, pleasant walks, delightsome places, they are at
hand: in aureis lac, vinum in argenteis, adolescentulae ad
nutum speciosae, wine, wenches, &c., a Turkish paradise, a
heaven upon earth. Though he be a silly soft fellow, and
scarce have common sense, yet if he be born to fortunes (as I
have said), jure haereditario sapere jubetur, he must have
honour and office in his course: Nemo nisi dives honore
dignis (Ambros. offic. 21.) none so worthy as himself: he
shall have it, atque esto quicquid Servius aut Labeo. Get
money enough and command kingdoms, provinces, armies, hearts,
hands, and affections; thou shalt have popes, patriarchs to
be thy chaplains and parasites: thou shalt have (Tamerlane-
like) kings to draw thy coach, queens to be thy laundresses,
emperors thy footstools, build more towns and cities than
great Alexander, Babel towers, pyramids and mausolean tombs,
&c., command heaven and earth, and tell the world it is thy
vassal, auro emitur diadema, argento coelum panditur,
denarius philosophum conducit, nummus jus cogit, obolus
literatum pascit, metallum sanitatem conciliat, aes amicos
conglutinat (a diadem is purchased with gold; silver opens
the way to heaven; philosophy may be hired for a penny; money
controls justice; one obolus satisfies a man of letters;
precious metal procures health; wealth attaches friends.) 
And therefore not without good cause, John de Medicis, that
rich Florentine, when he lay upon his death-bed, calling his
sons, Cosmo and Laurence, before him, amongst other sober
sayings, repeated this, animo quieto digredior, quod vos
sanos et divites post me relinquam, "It doth me good to think
yet, though I be dying, that I shall leave you, my children,
sound and rich:" for wealth sways all. It is not with us, as
amongst those Lacedemonian senators of Lycurgus in Plutarch,
"He preferred that deserved best, was most virtuous and
worthy of the place, not swiftness, or strength, or wealth,
or friends carried it in those days:" but inter optimos
optimus, inter temperantes temperantissimus, the most
temperate and best. We have no aristocracies but in
contemplation, all oligarchies, wherein a few rich men
domineer, do what they list, and are privileged by their
greatness. They may freely trespass, and do as they please,
no man dare accuse them, no not so much as mutter against
them, there is no notice taken of it, they may securely do
it, live after their own laws, and for their money get
pardons, indulgences, redeem their souls from purgatory and
hell itself, clausum possidet arca Jovem. Let them be
epicures, or atheists, libertines, machiavelians (as they
often are), "Et quam vis perjurus erit, sine gente,
cruentus," they may go to heaven through the eye of a needle,
if they will themselves, they may be canonised for saints,
they shall be honourably interred in mausolean tombs,
commended by poets, registered in histories, have temples and
statues erected to their names, -- e manibus illis --
nascentur violae.-- If he be bountiful in his life, and
liberal at his death, he shall have one to swear, as he did
by Claudius the Emperor in Tacitus, he saw his soul go to
heaven, and be miserably lamented at his funeral. Ambubaiarum
collegiae, &c. Trimalcionis topanta in Petronius recta in
coelum abiit, went right to heaven: a base quean, "thou
wouldst have scorned once in thy misery to have a penny from
her;" and why? modio nummos metiit, she measured her money by
the bushel. These prerogatives do not usually belong to rich
men, but to such as are most part seeming rich, let him have
but a good outside, he carries it, and shall be adored for a
god, as Cyrus was amongst the Persians, ob splendidum
apparatum, for his gay attires; now most men are esteemed
according to their clothes. In our gullish times, whom you
peradventure in modesty would give place to, as being
deceived by his habit, and presuming him some great
worshipful man, believe it, if you shall examine his estate,
he will likely be proved a serving man of no great note, my
lady's tailor, his lordship's barber, or some such gull, a
Fastidius Brisk, Sir Petronel Flash, a mere outside. Only
this respect is given him, that wheresoever he comes, he may
call for what he will, and take place by reason of his
outward habit.

But on the contrary, if he be poor, Prov. xv. 15. "all his
days are miserable," he is under hatches, dejected, rejected
and forsaken, poor in purse, poor in spirit; prout res nobis
fluit, ita et animus se habet;  money gives life and soul.
Though he be honest, wise, learned, well deserving, noble by
birth, and of excellent good parts; yet in that he is poor,
unlikely to rise, come to honour, office or good means, he is
contemned, neglected, frustra sapit, inter literas esurit,
amicus molestus. "If he speak, what babbler is this?" Ecclus.
his nobility without wealth, is projecta vilior alga, (Hor.
"more worthless than rejected weeds.") and he not esteemed:
nos viles pulli nati infelicibus ovis, if once poor, we are
metamorphosed in an instant, base slaves, villains, and vile
drudges: for to be poor, is to be a knave, a fool, a wretch,
a wicked, an odious fellow, a common eye-sore, say poor and
say all: they are born to labour, to misery, to carry burdens
like juments, piscum stercus comedere with Ulysses'
companions, and as Chremilus objected in Aristophanes, salem
lingere, lick salt, to empty jakes, fay channels, carry out
dirt and dunghills, sweep chimneys, rub horse-heels, &c. I
say nothing of Turks, galley-slaves, which are bought and
sold like juments, or those African negroes, or poor Indian
drudges, qui indies hinc inde deferendis oneribus occumbunt,
nam quod apud nos boves et asini vehunt, trahunt, &c. ("Who
daily faint beneath the burdens they are compelled to carry
from place to place: for they carry and draw the loads which
oxen and asses formerly use, &c.") Id omne misellis indis,
they are ugly to behold, and though erst spruce, now rusty
and squalid, because poor, immundas fortunas aequm est
squalorum sequi, it is ordinarily so. "Others eat to live,
but they live to drudge," Servilis et misera gens nihil
recusare audit, a servile generation, that dare refuse no
task.--"Heus tu, dromo, cape hoc flabellum, ventulum hinc
facito dum lavamus," sirrah, blow wind upon us while we wash,
and bid your fellow get him up betimes in the morning, be it
fair or foul, he shall run fifty miles afoot to-morrow, to
carry me a letter to my mistress, Socia ad pistrinum, Socia
shall tarry at home and grind malt all day long, Tristan
thresh. Thus are they commanded, being indeed some of them as
so many footstools for rich men to tread on, blocks for them
to get on horseback, or as "walls for them to piss on." They
are commonly such people, rude, silly, superstitious idiots,
nasty, unclean, lousy, poor, dejected, slavishly humble: and
as Leo Afer observes of the commonalty of Africa, natura
viliores sunt, nec apud suos duces majore in precio quam si
canes assent: base by nature, and no more esteemed than dogs,
miseram, laboriosam, calamitosam vitam agunt, et inopem,
infoelicem, rudiores asinis, ut e brutis plane natos dicas:
no learning, no knowledge, no civility, scarce common sense,
naught but barbarism amongst them, belluino more vivunt,
neque calceos gestant, neque vestes, like rogues and
vagabonds, they go barefooted and barelegged, the soles of
their feet being as hard as horsehoofs, as Radzivilus
observed at Damietta in Egypt, leading a laborious,
miserable, wretched, unhappy life, "like beasts and juments,
if not worse:" (for a Spaniard in Incatan, sold three Indian
boys for a cheese, and a hundred negro slaves for a horse)
their discourse is scurrility, their summum bonum a pot of
ale. There is not any slavery which these villains will not
undergo, interillos plerique latrinas evacuant, alii
culinarum curant, alii stabularios agunt, urinatores, et id
genus similia exercent, &c. like those people that dwell in
the Alps, chimney-sweepers, jakes-farmers, dirt-daubers,
vagrant rogues, they labour hard some, and yet cannot get
clothes to put on, or bread to eat. For what can filthy
poverty give else, but beggary, fulsome nastiness, squalor,
content, drudgery, labour, ugliness, hunger and thirst;
pediculorum, et pulicum numerum? as he well followed it in
Aristophanes, fleas and lice, pro pallium vestem laceram, et
pro pulvinari lapidem bene magnum ad caput, rags for his
raiment, and a stone for his pillow, pro cathedra, ruptae
caput urnae, he sits in a broken pitcher, or on a block for a
chair, et malvae ramos pro panibus comedit, he drinks water,
and lives on wort leaves, pulse, like a hog, or scraps like a
dog, ut nunc nobis vita afficitur, quis non putabit insaniam
esse, infelicitatemque?  as Chremilus concludes his speech,
as we poor men live now-a-days, who will not take our life to
be infelicity, misery, and madness?

If they be of little better condition than those base
villains, hunger-starved beggars, wandering rogues, those
ordinary slaves and day-labouring drudges; yet they are
commonly so preyed upon by polling officers for breaking the
laws, by their tyrannizing landlords, so flayed and fleeced
by perpetual exactions, that though they do drudge, fare
hard, and starve their genius, they cannot live in some
countries; but what they have is instantly taken from them,
the very care they take to live, to be drudges, to maintain
their poor families, their trouble and anxiety "takes away
their sleep," Sirac. xxxi. 1. it makes them weary of their
lives: when they have taken all pains, done their utmost and
honest endeavours, if they be cast behind by sickness, or
overtaken with years, no man pities them, hard-hearted and
merciless, uncharitable as they are, they leave them so
distressed, to beg, steal, murmur, and rebel, or else starve.
The feeling and fear of this misery compelled those old
Romans, whom Menenius Agrippa pacified, to resist their
governors, outlaws, and rebels in most places, to take up
seditious arms, and in all ages hath caused uproars,
murmurings, seditions, rebellions, thefts, murders, mutinies,
jars and contentions in every commonwealth: grudging,
repining, complaining, discontent in each private family,
because they want means to live according to their callings,
bring up their children, it breaks their hearts, they cannot
do as they would. No greater misery than for a lord to have a
knight's living, a gentleman a yeoman's, not to be able to
live as his birth and place require. Poverty and want are
generally corrosives to all kind of men, especially to such
as have been in good and flourishing estate, are suddenly
distressed, nobly born, liberally brought up, and by some
disaster and casualty miserably dejected. For the rest, as
they have base fortunes, so have they base minds
correspondent, like beetles, e stercore orti, e stercore
victus, in stercore delicium, as they were obscurely born and
bred, so they delight in obscenity; they are not so
thoroughly touched with it. Angustas animas angusto in
pectore versant ("A narrow breast conceals a narrow soul").
Yea, that which is no small cause of their torments, if once
they come to be in distress, they are forsaken of their
fellows, most part neglected, and left unto themselves; as
poor Terence in Rome was by Scipio, Iselius, and Furius, his
great and noble friends.

"Nil Publius Scipio profuit, nil ei Laelius, nil Furius,
Tres per idem tempus qui agitabant nobiles facillime,
Horum ille opera ne domum quidem habuit conductitiam."
("Publius Scipio, Laelius and Furius, three of the most
distinguished noblemen at that day in Rome, were of so little
service to him, that he could scarcely procure a lodging
through their patronage.")

'Tis generally so, Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris, he
is left cold and comfortless, nullus ad amissas ibit amicus
opes, all flee from him as from a rotten wall, now ready to
fall on their heads. Prov. xix. 4. "Poverty separates them
from their neighbours."

"Dum fortuna favet, vultum servatis, amici,
Cum cecidit, turpi vertitis ora fuga."
"Whilst fortune favour'd, friends, you smiled on me,
But when she fled, a friend I could not see."

Which is worse yet, if he be poor every man contemns him,
insults over him, oppresseth him, scoffs at, aggravates his
misery.

"Quum coepit quassata dumus subsidere, partes
in proclinitas omne recumbit onus."
"When once the totteritg house begins to shrink,
Thither comes all the weight by an instinct."

Nay, they are odious to their own brethren and dearest
friends, Prov. xix. 7, "His brethren hate him if he be poor,"
omnes vicini oderunt, "his neighbours hate him," Prov. xiv.
20. omnes me noti ac ignoti deserunt, as he complained in the
comedy, friends and strangers, all forsake me. Which is most
grievous, poverty makes men ridiculous, Nil habet infelix
paupertas durius in se, quam quod ridiculos homines facit,
they must endure jests, taunts, flouts, blows of their
betters, and take all in good part to get a meal's meat:
magnum pauperies opprobrium, jubet quidvis et facere et pati.
He must turn parasite, jester, fool, cum desipientibus
desipere; saith Euripides, slave, villain, drudge to get a
poor living, apply himself to each man's humours, to win and
please, &c., and be buffeted when he hath all done, as
Ulysses was by Melanthius in Homer, be reviled, baffled,
insulted over, for potentiorum stultitia perferenda est, and
may not so much as mutter against it. He must turn rogue and 
villain; for as the saying is, Necessitas cogit ad turpia,
poverty alone makes men thieves, rebels, murderers, traitors,
assassins, "because of poverty we have sinned," Ecclus.
xxvii. 1. swear and forswear, bear false witness, lie,
dissemble, any thing, as I say, to advantage themselves, and
to relieve their necessities: Culpae sclerisque magistra est,
when a man is driven to his shifts, what will he not do?

"-- sit miserium fortuna Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam mendacemque improba finget"
("Since cruel fortune has made Sinon poor, she has made him
vain and mendacious")

he will betray his father, prince, and country, turn Turk,
forsake religion, abjure God and all, nulla quam Horrenda
proditio, quam illi lucri causa (saith Leo Afer) perpetrare
nolint. Plato, therefore, calls poverty, "thievish,
sacrilegious, filthy, wicked and mischievous:" and well he
might. For it makes many an upright man otherwise, had he not
been in want, to take bribes, to be corrupt, to do against
his conscience, to sell his tongue, heart, hand, &c., to be
churlish, hard, unmerciful, uncivil, to use indirect means to
help his present estate. It makes princes to exact upon their
subjects, great men tyrannise, landlords oppress, justice
mercenary, lawyers vultures, physicians harpies, friends
importunate, tradesmen liars, honest men thieves, devout
assassins, great men to prostitute their wives, daughters,
and themselves, middle sort to repine, commons to mutiny, all
to grudge, murmur, and complain. A great temptation to all
mischief it compels some miserable wretches to counterfeit
several diseases, to dismember, make themselves blind, lame,
to have a more plausible cause to beg, and lose their limbs
to recover their present wants. Jodocus Damhoderius, a lawyer
of Bruges, praxi rerum criminal. c. 112, hath some notable
examples of such counterfeit cranks, and every village almost
will yield abundant testimonies amongst us; we have
dummerers, Abraham men, &c. And that which is the extent of
misery, it enforceth them, through anguish and wearisomeness
of their lives, to make away themselves: they had rather be
hanged, drowned, &c., than to live without means.

"In mare coetiferum, ne te premet aspera egestas,
Desili, et a celsis corrue Cerne jugis."
"Much better 'tis to break thy neck,
Or drown thyself I' the sea,
Than suffer irksome poverty;
Go make thyself away."

A Sybarite of old, as I find it registered in Athenaeus,
supping in Phiditiis in Sparta, and observing their bad fare,
said it was no marvel if the Lacedaemonians were valiant men;
"for his part he would rather run upon a sword point (and so
would any man in his wits), than live with such base diet, or
lead so wretched a life." In Japonia 'tis a common thing to
stifle their children if they be poor, or to make an
abortion, which Aristotle commends. In that civil
commonwealth of China, the mother strangles her child if she
be not able to bring it up, and had rather lose than sell it,
or have it endure such misery as poor men do. Arnobius, lib.
7. adversus gentes, Lactantius, lib. 5. cap. 9. objects as
much to those ancient Greeks and Romans, "they did expose
their children to wild beasts, strangle or knock out their
brains against a stone, in such cases." If we may give credit
to Munster, amongst us Christians in Lithuania, they
voluntarily mancipate and sell themselves, their wives and
children to rich men, to avoid hunger and beggary; many make
away themselves in this extremity. Apicius the Roman, when he
cast up his accounts, and found but 100,000 crowns left,
murdered himself for fear he should be famished to death. P.
Forestus, in his medicinal observations, hath a memorable
example of two brothers of Louvain that, being destitute of
means, became both melancholy, and in a discontented humour
massacred themselves. Another of a merchant, learned, wise
otherwise and discreet, but out of a deep apprehension he had
of a loss at seas, would not be persuaded but as Ventidius in
the poet, he should die a beggar. In a word, thus much I may
conclude of poor men, that though they have good parts they
cannot show or make use of them: ab inopia ad virtutem
obsepta est via, 'tis hard for a poor man to rise, haud facie
emergunt, quoram virtutibus obstat rea angusta domi. (They
cannot easily rise in the world who are pinched by povery at
home.) "The wisdom of the poor is despised, and his words are
not heard." Eccles. vi. 19. His works are rejected,
contemned, for the baseness and obscurity of the author,
though laudable and good in themselves, they will not likely
take.

"Nulla placere diu, neque vivere carmine possunt,
Quae scribuntur aquae potoribus"--

"No verses can please men or live long that are written by
water-drinkers." Poor men cannot please, their actions,
counsels, consultations, projects, are vilified in the
world's esteem, amittunt consilium in re, which Gnatho long
since observed. Sapiens crepidas sibi nunquam nec soleas
fecit, a wise man never cobbled shoes; as he said of old, but
how doth he prove it? I am sure we find it otherwise in our
days, pruinosis horret facundia pannis. Homer himself must
beg if he want means, and as by report sometimes he did "go
from door to door, and sing ballads, with a company of boys
about him." This common misery of theirs must needs distract,
make them discontent and melancholy, as ordinarily they are,
wayward, peevish, like a weary traveller, for Fames et mora
bilem in nares conciunt, still murmuring and repining: Ob
inopiam morosi sunt, quibus est male, as Plutarch quotes out
of Euripides, and that comical poet well seconds,

"Omnes quibus res sunt minus secundae, nescio, quomodo
Suspitiosi, ad contumeliam omnia accipiunt magis,
Propter suam impotentiam se credunt negligi."

"If they be in adversity, they are more suspicious and apt to
mistake: they think themselves scorned by reason of their
misery:" and therefore many generous spirits in such cases
withdraw themselves from all company, as that comedian
Terence is said to have done; when he perceived himself to be
forsaken and poor, he voluntarily banished himself to
Stymphalus, a base town in Arcadia, and there miserably died.

"-- ad summam inopiam redactus,
Itaque e conspectu omnium abiit Graeciae in terram ultimam."
("Reduced to the greatest necessity, he withdrew from the
gaze of the public to the most remote village in Greece")
Neither is it without cause, for we see men commonly
respected according to their means (an dives sit omnes
querunt, nemo an bonus), and vilified if they be in bad
clothes. Philophaemen the orator was set to cut wood, because
he was so homely attired, Terentius was placed at the lower
end of Cecilius' table, because of his homely outside. Dante,
that famous Italian poet, by reason his clothes were but
mean, could not be admitted to sit down at a feast. Gnatho
scorned his old familiar friend because of his apparel,
Hominem video pannis, annisque obsitum, hice ego ilium
contempsi prae me. King Persius overcome sent a letter to
Paulus Aemilius, the Roman general; Persius P. Consuli, S.
but he scorned him any answer, tacite exprobrans fortunam
suam (saith mine author), upbraiding him with a present
fortune. Carolus Pugnax, that great duke of Burgundy, made H.
Holland, late duke of Exeter, exiled, run after his horse
like a lackey, and would take no notice of him; 'tis the
common fashion of the world. So that such men as are poor may
justly be discontent, melancholy, and complain of their
present misery, and all may pray with Solomon, "Give me, O
Lord, neither riches nor poverty; feed me with food
convenient for me."



SUBSECT. VII.-- A heap of other Accidents causing Melancholy,
Death of Friends, Losses, &c.


IN this labyrinth of accidental causes, the farther I wander,
the more intricate I find the passage, multae ambages, and
new causes as so many by-paths offer themselves to be
discussed: to search out all, were an Herculean work, and
fitter for Theseus: I will follow mine intended thread; and
point only at some few of the chiefest.

Death of Friends.] Amongst which, loss and death of friends
may challenge a first place, multi tristantur, as Vives well
observes, post delicias, convivia, dies festos, many are
melancholy after a feast, holiday, merry meeting, or some
pleasing sport, if they be solitary by chance, left alone to
themselves, without employment, sport, or want their ordinary
companions, some at the departure of friends only whom they
shall shortly see again, weep and howl, and look after them
as a cow lows after her calf, or a child takes on that goes
to school after holidays. Ut me levarat tuus adventus, sic
discessus afflixit, (which Tully writ to Atticus) thy coming
was not so welcome to me, as thy departure was harsh.
Montanus, consil. 132. makes mention of a country woman that
parting with her friends and native place, became grievously
melancholy for many years; and Trallianus of another, so
caused for the absence of her husband: which is an ordinary
passion amongst our good wives, if their husband tarry out a
day longer than his appointed time, or break his hour, they
take on presently with sighs and tears, he is either robbed,
or dead, some mischance or other is surely befallen him, the
cannot eat, drink, sleep, or be quiet in mind, till they see
him again. If parting of friends, absence alone can work such
violent effects, what shall death do, when they must
eternally be separated, never in this world to meet again.
This is so grievous a torment for the time, that it takes
away their appetite, desire of life, extinguisheth all
delights, it causeth deep sighs and groans, tears,
exclamations,

("O dulce germen matris, o sanguis meus,
Eheu tepentes, &c. -- o flos tener.")
(Oh sweet offspring, oh my very blood: oh tender flower, &c.)

howling, roaring, many bitter pangs (lamentis gemituque et
foemineo ululatu Tecta fremunt), and by frequent meditation
extends so far sometimes, "they think they see their dead
friends continually in their eyes," observantes imagines, as
Conciliator confesseth he saw his mother's ghost presenting
herself still before him. Quod nimis miseri volunt, hoc
facile credunt, still, still, still, that good father, that
good son, that good wife,that dear friend runs in their
minds: Totus animus hac una cogitatione defixus est, all the
year long, as Pliny complains to Romanus, "methinks I see
Virginius, I hear Virginius, I talk with Virginius," &c.

Te sine, vae misero mihi, lilia nigra videntur,
Pallentesque rosae, nec dulce rubens hyacinthus,
Nullos nec myrtus, nec laurus spirat odores."
(Calphurnius Graecus. "Without thee, ah! wretched me, the
lilies lose their whiteness, the roses become pallid, the
hyacinths forget to blush; neither the myrtle nor the laurel
retains its colours.")

They that are most staid and patient, are so furiously
carried headlong by the passion of sorrow in this case, that
brave discreet men otherwise, oftentimes forget themselves,
and weep like children many months together, "as if that they
to water would," and will not be comforted. They are gone,
they are gone; what shall do?

"Abstulit atra dies et funere mersit acerbo,
Quis dabit in lachrymas fontem mihi? qui satis altos
Accendet gemitus, et acerbo verba dolori?
Exhaurit pietas oculos, et hiantia frangit
Pectora, nec plenos avido sinit edere questus,
Magna adea jactura premit," &c.
"Fountains of tears who gives, who lends me groans,
Deep sighs sufficient to express my moans?
Mine eyes are dry, my breast in pieces torn,
My loss so great, I cannot enough mourn."

So Stroza Filius, that elegant Italian poet, in his
Epicedium, bewails his father's death, he could moderate his
passions in other matters (as he confesseth), but not in
this, he yields wholly to sorrow,

"Nunc fateor do terra malis, mens illa fatiscit,
Indomitus quondam vigor et constantia mentis."

How doth Quintilian complain for the loss of his son, to
despair almost: Cardan lament his only child in his book de
libris propiis, and elsewhere in many other of his tracts,
St. Ambrose his brother's death? an ego possum non cogitare
de te, aut sine lachrymis cogitare? O amari dies, o flebiles
noctes, &c. "Can I ever cease to think of thee, and to think
with sorrow? O bitter days, O nights of sorrow," &c. Gregory
Nazianzen, that noble Pulcheria! O decorem, &c. flos recens,
pullulans, &c. Alexander, a man of most invincible courage,
after Hephestion's death, as Curtius relates, triduum jacuit
ad moriendum obstinatus, lay three days together upon the
ground, obstinate, to die with him, and would neither eat,
drink, nor sleep. The woman that communed with Esdras (lib.
2. cap. 10.) when her son fell down dead, "fled into the
field, and would not return into the city, but there resolved
to remain, neither to eat nor drink, but mourn and fast until
she died." "Rachel wept for her children, and would not be
comforted because they were not." Matt. ii. 18. So did Adrian
the emperor bewail his Antinous; Hercules, Hylas; Orpheus,
Eurydice; David, Absalom; (O my dear son Absalom;) Austin his
mother Monica, Niobe her children, insomuch that the poets
feigned her to be turned into a stone, as being stupified
through the extremity of grief. Aegeus, signo lugubri filii
consternatus, in mare se praetipitem dedit, impatient of
sorrow for his son's death, drowned himself. Our late
physicians are full of such examples. Montanus, consil. 242.
had a patient troubled with this infirmity, by reason of her
husband's death, many years together. Trincavellius, l. 1. c.
14. hath such another, almost in despair, after his mother's
departure, ut se ferme praecipitem daret; and ready through
distraction to make away himself: and in his Fifteenth
counsel, tells a story of one fifty years of age, "that grew
desperate upon his mother's death;" and cured by Fallopius,
fell many years after into a relapse, by the sudden death of
a daughter which he had, and could never after be recovered.
The fury of this passion is so violent sometimes, that it
daunts whole kingdoms and cities. Vespasian's death was
pitifully lamented all over the Roman empire, totus orbis
lugebat, saith Aurelius Victor. Alexander commanded the
battlements of houses to be pulled down, mules and horses to
have their manes shorn off and many common soldiers to be
slain, to accompany his dear Hephestion's death; which is now
practised amongst the Tartars, when a great Cham dieth, ten
or twelve thousand must be slain, men and horses, all they
meet; and among those the pagan Indians, their wives and
servants voluntarily die with them. Leo Decimus was so much
bewailed in Rome after his departure, that as Jovius gives
out, communis salus, publica hilaritas, the common safety of
all good fellowship, peace, mirth, and plenty died with him,
tanquam eodem sepulchro cum Leone condita lugebantur; for it
was a golden age whilst he lived, but after his decease, an
iron season succeeded, barbara vis et foeda vastitas, et dira
malorum omnium incommoda, wars, plagues, vastity, discontent.
When Augustus Caesar died, saith Paterculus, orbis ruinam
timueramus, we were all afraid, as if heaven had fallen upon
our heads. Budatus records, how that, at Lewis the Twelfth
his death, tam subita mutatio, ut qui prius digito coelum
attingere videbantur, nunc humi derepente serpere, sideratos
esse diceres, they that were erst in heaven, upon a sudden,
as if they had been planet-strucken, lay grovelling on the
ground;

"Concussis cecidere animis, seu frondibus ingens
Sylva dolet lapsis"--
(Maph. "They became fallen in feelings, as the great forest
laments its fallen leaves")

they looked like cropped trees. At Nancy in Lorraine, when
Claudia Valesia, Henry the Second French king's sister, and
the duke's wife deceased, the temples for forty days were all
shut up, no prayers nor masses, bat in that room where she
was. The senators all seen in black, and for a twelvemonth's
space throughout the city, they were forbid to sing or dance.

"Non ulli pastores illis egere diebus
Frigida (Daphne) boves ad flumina, nulla nec amnem
Libavit quadrupes nec graminis attigit herbam."
"The swains forget their sheep, nor near the brink
Of running waters brought their herds to drink;
The thirsty cattle, of themselves, abstain'd
From water, and their grassy fare disdain'd."

How were we affected here in England for our Titus, deliciae
humani generis, Prince Henry's immature death, as if all our
dearest friends' lives had exhaled with his? Scanderbeg's
death was not so much lamented in Epirus. In a word, as he
saith of Edward the First at the news of Edward of Caernarvon
his son's birth, immortaliter gavisus, he was immortally
glad, may we say on the contrary of friends' deaths,
immortaliter gementes, we are diverse of us as so many
turtles, eternally dejected with it.

Loss of  goods] There is another sorrow, which arises from
the loss of temporal goods and fortunes, which equally
afflicts, and may go hand in hand with the preceding; loss of
time, loss of honour, office, of good name, of labour,
frustrate hopes, will much torment; but in my judgment, there
is no torture like unto it, or that sooner procureth this
malady and mischief:

"Ploratur lachrymis anima pecunia veris:"
"Lost money is bewailed with grief sincere:"

it wrings true tears from our eyes, many sighs, much sorrow
from our hearts, and often causes habitual melancholy itself.
Guianerius, tract. 15. 5. repeats this for an especial cause:
"Loss of friends, and loss of goods, make many men
melancholy, as I have often seen by continual meditation of
such things." The same causes Arnoldus Villanovanus
inculcates, Breviar. l. 1. c. 18. ex rerum emissione, damno,
amicorum morte, &c. Want alone will make a man mad, to be
Sans argent will cause a deep and grievous melancholy. Many
are affected like Irishmen in this behalf, who if they have a
good scimitar, had rather have a blow on their arm, than
their weapon hurt: they will sooner lose their life, than
their goods: and the grief that cometh hence, continueth long
(saith Plater) "and out of many dispositions procureth an
habit." Montanus and Frisemelica cured a young man of 22
years of age, that so became melancholy, ob amissam pecuniam,
for a sum of money which he had unhappily lost. Skenckius
hath such another story of one melancholy, because he
overshot himself and spent his stock in unnecessary building.
Roger, that rich bishop of Salisbury, exutus opibus et
castris a Rege Stephano, spoiled of his goods by king
Stephen, vi doloris absorptus, atque in amentiam versus,
indecentia fecit, through grief ran mad, spoke and did he
knew not what. Nothing so familiar, as for men in such cases,
through anguish of mind to make away themselves. A poor
fellow went to hang himself (which Ausonius hath elegantly
expressed in a neat Epigram), but finding by chance a pot of
money, flung away the rope, and went merrily home, but he
that hid the gold, when he missed it, hanged himself with
that rope which the other man had left, in a discontented
humour.

"At qui condiderat postquam non reperit aurum,
Apavit collo, quem reperit, laqueum"

Such feral accidents can want and penury produce. Be it by
suretyship, shipwreck, fire, spoil and pillage of soldiers,
or what loss soever, it boots not, it will work the like
effect, the same desolation in provinces and cities, as well
as private persons. The Romans were miserably dejected after
the battle of Cannae, the men amazed for fear, the stupid
women tore their hair and cried. The Hungarians, when their
king Ladislaus and bravest soldiers were slain by the Turks,
Luctus publicus, &c. The Venetians, when their forces were
overcome by the French king Lewis, the French and Spanish
kings, pope, emperor, all conspired against them at Cambray,
the French herald denounced open war in the senate: Lauredane
Venetorum dux, &c., and they had lost Padua, Brixia, Verona,
Forum Julii, their territories in the continent, and had now
nothing left but the city of Venice itself, et urbi quoque
ipsi, (saith Bembus) timendum putarent, and the loss of that
was likewise to be feared, tantus repente dolor omnnes
tenuit, ut nunquam alias, &c., they were pitifully plunged,
never before in such lamentable distress. Anno 1527, when
Rome was sacked by Burbonius, the common soldiers made such
spoil, that fair churches were turned to stables, old
monuments and books made horse-litter, or burned like straw;
relics, costly pictures defaced; altars demolished, rich
hangings, carpets, &c., trampled in the dirt. Their wives and
loveliest daughters constuprated by every base cullion, as
Sejanus' daughter was by the hangman in public, before their
fathers' and husbands' faces. Noblemen's children, and of the
wealthiest citizens, reserved for princes' beds, were
prostitute to every common soldier, and kept for concubines;
senators and cardinals themselves dragged along the streets,
and put to exquisite torments, to confess where their money
was hid; the rest murdered on heaps, lay stinking in the
streets; infants' brains dashed out before their mothers'
eyes. A lamentable sight it was to see so goodly a city so
suddenly defaced, rich citizens sent a begging to Venice,
Naples, Ancona, &c., that erst lived in all manner of
delights. "Those proud palaces that even now vaunted their
tops up to heaven, were dejected as low as hell in an
instant." Whom will not such misery make discontent? Terence
the poet drowned himself (some say) for the loss of his
comedies, which suffered shipwreck. When a poor man hath made
many hungry meals, got together a small sum, which he loseth
in an instant; a scholar spent many an hour's study to no
purpose, his labours lost, &c., how should it otherwise be? I
may conclude with Gregory, temporalium amor, quantum afficit
cum hoeret possessio, tantum quum subtrahitur, urit dolor;
riches do not so much exhilarate us with their possession, as
they torment us with their loss.

Fear] Next to sorrow still I may annex such accidents as
procure fear; for besides those terrors which I have before
touched, and many other fears (which are infinite) there is a
superstitious fear, one of the three great causes of fear in
Aristotle, commonly caused by prodigies and dismal accidents,
which much trouble many of us. (Nescio quid animus mihi
praesagit mali.) As if a hare cross the way at our going
forth, or a mouse gnaw our clothes: if they bleed three drops
at nose, the salt fall towards them, a black spot appear in
their nails, &c., with many such, which Delrio, Tom. 2. l. 3.
sect. 4, Austin Niphus in his book de Auguriis, Polydore
Virg., l. 3. de Prodigiis, Sarisburiensis, Polycrat. l. 1. c.
13., discuss at large. They are so much affected, that with
the very strength of imagination, fear, and the devil's
craft, ""they pull those misfortunes they suspect upon own
heads, and that which they fear shall come upon them," as
Solomon foretelleth, Prov. x. 24. and Isaiah denounceth,
lxvi. 4. which if "they could neglect and contemn, would not
come to pass, Eorum vires nostra resident opinione, ut morbi
gravitos aegrotantium cogitatione, they are intended and
remitted, as our opinion is fixed, more or less. N. N. dat
poenas, saith Crato of such a one, utinam non attraheret: he
is punished, and is the cause of it himself: Dum fata
fugimus, fates stulti incurrimus, the thing that I feared,
saith Job, is fallen upon me.

As much we may say of them that are troubled with their
fortunes; or ill destinies foreseen: multos angit
praescientia malorum: The foreknowledge of what shall come to
pass, crucifies many men: foretold by astrologers, or
wizards, iratum ob coelum, be it ill accident, or death
itself: which often falls out by God's permission; quia
daemonem timent (saith Chrysostom) Deus ideo permittit
accidere. Severus, Adrian, Domitian, can testify as much, of
whose fear and suspicion, Sueton, Herodian, and the rest of
those writers, tell strange stories in this behalf. Montanus,
consil. 31. hath one example of a young man, exceeding
melancholy upon this occasion. Such fears have still
tormented mortal men in all ages, by reason of those lying
oracles, and juggling priests. There was a fountain in
Greece, near Ceres' temple in Achaia, where the event of such
diseases was to be known; "A glass let down by a thread," &c.
Amongst those Cyanean rocks at the springs of Lycia, was the
oracle of Thrixeus Apollo, "where all fortunes were foretold,
sickness, health, or what they would besides:" so common
people have been always deluded with future events. At this
day, Metus futurorum maxime torquet Sinas, this foolish fear
mightily crucifies them in China: as Matthew Riccius the
Jesuit informeth in his commentaries of those countries, of
all nations they are most superstitious, and much tormented
in this kind, attributing so much to their divinators, ut
ipse metus fidem faciat, that fear itself and conceit cause
it to k fall out: if he foretell sickness such a day, that
very time they will be sick, vi metus afflicti in
aegritudinem cadunt; and many times die as it is foretold. A
true saying, Timor mortis, morte pejor, the fear of death is
worse than death itself and the memory of that sad hour, to
some fortunate and rich men, "is as bitter as gall," Ecclus.
xli. 1. Inquietam nobis vitam facit mortis metus, a worse
plague cannot happen to a man, than to be so troubled in his
mind; 'tis triste divortium, a heavy separation, to leave
their goods, with so much labour got, pleasures of the
world,which they have so deliciously enjoyed, friends and
companions whom they so dearly loved, all at once. Axicchus
the philosopher was bold and courageous all his life, and
gave good precepts de contemnenda morte, and against the
vanity of the world, to others; but being now ready to die
himself, he was mightily dejected, hac luce privabor? his
orbabor bonis? ("Must I be deprived of this life,-- of those
possessions?") he lamented like a child, &c. And though
Socrates himself was there to comfort him, ubi pristina
virtuum jactatio, O Axioche? "where is all your boasted
virtue now, my friend?" yet he was very timorous and
impatient of death, much troubled in his mind, imbellis pavor
et impatientia,&c. "O Clotho," Megapetus the tyrant in Lucian
exclaims, now ready to depart, "let me live a while longer. I
will give thee a thousand talents of gold, and two boles
besides, which I took from Cleocritus, worth a hundred
talents apiece." "Woe's me," saith another, "what goodly
manors shall I leave! what fertile fields! what a fine house!
what pretty children! how many servants! Who shall gather my
grapes, my corn? Must I now die so well settled? Leave all,
so richly and well provided? Woe's me, what shall I do?"
Animula vagula, blandula, quae nunc abibis in loca?

To these tortures of fear and sorrow, may well be annexed
curiosity, that irksome, that tyrannising care, nimia
solicitudo, "superfluous industry about unprofitable things
and their qualities," as Thomas defines it; an itching humour
or a kind of longing to see that which is not to be seen, to
do that which ought not to be done, to know that secret which
should not be known, to eat of the forbidden fruit. We
commonly molest and tire ourselves about things unfit and 
unnecessary, as Martha troubled herself to little purpose. Be
it in religion, humanity, magic, philosophy, policy, any
action or study, 'tis a needless trouble, a mere torment. For
what else is school divinity, how many doth it puzzle? what
fruitless questions about the Trinity, resurrection,
election, predestination, reprobation, hell-fire, &c., how
many shall be saved, damned? What else is all superstition,
but an endless observation of idle ceremonies, traditions?
What is most of our philosophy but a labyrinth of opinions,
idle questions, propositions, metaphysical terms? Socrates,
therefore, held all philosophers, cavillers, and mad men,
circa subtila Cavillatores pro insanis habuit, palam eos
arguens, saith Eusebius, because they commonly sought after
such things, quae nec percipi a nobis neque comprehendi
possent, or put case they did understand, yet they were
altogether unprofitable. For what matter is it for us to know
how high the Pleiades are, how far distant Perseus and
Cassiopea from us, how deep the sea. &c.? we are neither
wiser, as he follows it, nor modester, nor better, nor
richer, nor stronger for the knowledge of it. Quod supra nos
nihil ad nos, I may say the same of those genethliacal
studies, what is astrology but vain elections, predictions?
all magic, but a troublesome error, a pernicious foppery?
physic, but intricate rules and prescriptions? philology, but
vain criticisms? logic, needless sophisms? metaphysics
themselves,but intricate subtilties and fruitless
abstractions? alchemy, but a bundle of errors? to what end
are such great tomes? why do we spend so many years in their
studies? Much better to know nothing at all, as those
barbarous Indians are wholly ignorant, than as some of us, to
be sore vexed about unprofitable toys: stultus labor est
ineptiarum, to build a house without pins, make a rope of
sand, to what end? cui bono? He studies on, but as the boy
told St Austin, when I have laved the sea dry, thou shalt
understand the mystery of the Trinity. He makes observations,
keeps times and seasons; and as Conradus the emperor would
not touch his new bride, till an astrologer had told him a
masculine hour, but with what success? He travels into
Europe, Africa, Asia, searcheth every creek, sea, city,
mountain, gulf, to what end? See one promontory (said
Socrates of old), one mountain, one sea, one river, and see
all. An alchemist spends his fortunes to find out the
philosopher's stone forsooth, cure all diseases, make men
long-lived, victorious, fortunate, invisible, and beggars
himself misled by those seducing impostors (which he shall
never attain) to make gold; an antiquary consumes his
treasure and time to scrape up a company of old coins,
statues, rules, edicts, manuscripts, &c., he must know what
was done of old in Athens, Rome, what lodging, diet, houses
they had, and have all the present news at first, though
never so remote, before all others, what projects, counsels,
consultations, &c., quid Juno in aurem insusurret Jovi,
what's now decreed in France, what in Italy: who was he,
whence comes he, which way, whither goes he, &c., Aristotle
must find out the motion of Euripus; Pliny must needs see
Vesuvius, but how sped they? One loseth goods, another his
life; Pyrrhus will conquer Africa first, and then Asia; he
will be a sole monarch, a second immortal, a third rich, a
fourth commands. Turbine magno spes solicitae in urbibus
errant; we run, ride, take indefatigable pains, all up early,
down late, striving to get that which we had better be
without (Ardelion's busy-bodies as we are), it were much
fitter for us to be quiet, sit still, and take our ease. His
sole study is for words, that they be -- Lepidae lexeis
compostae ut tesserulae omnes, not a syllable misplaced, to
set out a stramineous subject; as thine is about apparel, to
follow the fashion, to be terse and polite, 'tis thy sole
business: both with like profit. His only delight is
building, he spends himself to get curious pictures,
intricate models and plots, another is wholly ceremonious
about titles, degrees, inscriptions: a third is over-
solicitous about his diet, he must have such and such
exquisite sauces, meat so dressed, so far fetched, peregrini
aeris volucres, so cooked, &c., something to provoke thirst,
something anon to quench his thirst. Thus he redeems his
appetite with extraordinary charge to his purse, is seldom
pleased with any meal, whilst a trivial stomach useth all
with delight, and is never offended. Another must have roses
in winter, alieni temperis flores, snow-water in summer,
fruits before they can be or are usually ripe, artificial
gardens and fish-ponds on the tops of houses, all things
opposite to the vulgar sort, intricate and rare, or else they
are nothing worth. So busy, nice, curious wits, make that
insupportable in all vocations, trades, actions, employments,
which to duller apprehensions is not offensive, earnestly
seeking that which others so scornfully neglect. Thus through
our foolsh curiosity do we macerate ourselves, tire our
souls, and run headlong, through our indiscretion, perverse
will, and want of government, into many needless cares and
troubles, vain expenses, tedious journeys, painful hours; and
when all is done, quorsum haec? cui bono? to what end?

Nescire velli quae magister Maximus
Docere non vult, eriduta inscita est."
(Jos. Scaliger in Gnomit. "To profess a disinclination for
that knowledge which is beyond our reach, is pedantic
ignorance.")


Unfortunate marriage] Amongst these passions and irksome
accidents, unfortunate marriage maybe ranked: a condition of
life appointed by God himself in Paradise, an honourable and
happy estate, and as great a felicity as can befall a man in
this world, if the parties can agree as they ought, and live
as Seneca lived with his Paulina; but if they be unequally
matched, or at discord, a greater misery cannot be expected,
to have a scold, a slut, a harlot, a fool, a fury or a fiend,
there can be no such plague. Eccles. xxvi. 14. "He that hath
her is as if he held a scorpion," &c. xxvi. 25, "a wicked
wife makes a sorry countenance, a heavy heart, and he had
rather dwell with a lion than keep house with such a wife."
Her properties Jovianus Pontanus hath described at large,
Ant. dial. Tom. 2, under the name of Euphorbia. Or if they be
not equal in years, the like mischief happens. Cecilius in
Agellius lib. 2. cap. 23, complains much of an old wife, dum
ejus morti inhio, egomet mortuus vivo inter vivos, whilst I
gape after her death, I live a dead man amongst the living,
or if they dislike upon any occasion,

"Judge who that are unfortunately wed
What 'tis to come into a loathed bed."

The same inconvenience befals women.

"At vos o dure miseram lugete parentes,
Si ferro aut laqueo laeva hac me exolvere sorte
Sustineo:--"
"Hard hearted parents both lament my fate,
If self I kill or hang, to ease my state."


A young gentlewoman in Basil was married, saith Felix Plater,
observat. l. 1, to an ancient man against her will, whom she
could not affect; she was continually melancholy, and pined
away for grief; and though her husband did all he could
possibly to give her content, in a discontented humour at
length she hanged herself. Many other stories he relates in
this kind. Thus men are plagued with women; they again with
men, when they are of divers humours and conditions; he a
spendthrift, she sparing; one honest, the other dishonest,
&c. Parents many times disquiet their children, and they
their parents. "A foolish son is an heaviness to his mother."
Injusta noverca: a stepmother often vexeth a whole family, is
matter of repentance, exercise of patience, fuel of
dissension, which made Cato's son expostulate with his
father, why he should offer to marry his client Solinius'
daughter, a young wench, Cujus causa novercam induceret; what
offence had he done, that he should marry again?

Unkind, unnatural friends, evil neighbours, bad servants,
debts, and debates &c.] 'Twas Chion's sentence, comes aeris
alieni et litis est miseria, misery and usury do commonly
together; suretyship is the bane of many families, Sponde,
praesto noxa est: "he shall be sore vexed that is surety for
a stranger," Prov. xi, 15, "and he that hateth suretyship is
sure." Contention, brawling, lawsuits, falling out of
neighbours and friends.--discardia demens (Virg. Aen. 6,) are
equal to the first, grieve many a man, and vex his soul.
Nihil sane miserabilius eorum mentibus (as Boter holds),
"nothing so miserable as such men, full of cares, griefs,
anxieties, as if they were stabbed with a sharp sword, fear,
suspicion, desperation, sorrow, are their ordinary
companions." Our Welshmen are noted by some of their own
writers, to consume one another in this kind; but whosoever
they are that use it, these are their common symptoms,
especially if they be convict or overcome, cast in a suit.
Arius put out of a bishopric by Eustathias, turned heretic,
and lived after discontented all his life. Every repulse is
of like nature; heu quanta de spe decidi! Disgrace, infamy,
detraction, will almost affect as much, and that a long time
after. Hipponax, a satirical poet, so vilified and lashed two
painters in his iambics, ut ambo laqueo se suffocarent, Pliny
saith, both hanged themselves. All oppositions, dangers,
perplexities, discontents, to live in any suspense, are of
the same rank: potes hoc sub casu ducere somnos? Who can be
secure in such cases? Ill-bestowed benefits, ingratitude,
unthankful friends, and much disquiet molest some. Unkind
speeches trouble as many: uncivil carriage or dogged answers,
weak women above the rest, if they proceed from their sirly
husbands, are as bitter as gall, and not to be digested. A
glassman's wife in Basil became melancholy because her
husband said he would marry again if she died. "No cut to
unkindness," as the saying is, a frown and hard speech, ill
respect, a brow-beating, or bad look, especially to
courtiers, or such as attend upon great persons, is present
death: ingenium vulte statque caditque suo, they ebb and flow
with their masters' favours. Some persons are at their wits'
ends, if by chance they overshoot themselves, in their
ordinary speeches, or actions, which may after turn to their
disadvantage or disgrace, or have any secret disclosed.
Ronseus, epist. miscel. 3, reports of a gentlewoman, 25 years
old, that falling foul with one of her gossips, was upbraided
with a secret infirmity (no matter what) in public, and so
much grieved with it, that she did thereupon solitudines
quaerere, omnes ab se ablegare, ac tandem ingravissimam
inindens melancholiam, contabescere, forsake all company,
quite moped, and in a melancholy humour pine away. Others arc
as much tortured to see themselves rejected, contemned,
scorned, disabled, defamed, detracted, undervalued, or "left
behind their fellows." Lucian brings in Aetamacles, a
philosopher in his Lapith. convivio, much discontented that
he was not invited amongst the rest, expostulating the
matter, in a long epistle, with Aristenetus their host.
Prietextatus, a robed gentleman in Plutarch, would not sit
down at a feast, because he might not sit highest, but went
his ways all in a chafe. We see the common quarrellings that
are ordinary with us, for taking of the wall, precedency, and
the like, which though toys in themselves, and things of no
moment, yet they cause many distempers, much heart-burning
amongst us. Nothing pierceth deeper than a contempt or
disgrace, especially if they be generous spirits, scarce any
thing affects then more than to be despised or vilified.
Crato, consil. 16, l. 2, exemplifies it, and common
experience confirms it. Of the same nature is oppression,
Eccles. vii. 7, "surely oppression makes a man mad," loss of
liberty, which made Brutus venture his life, Cato kill
himself and Tully complain, Omnem hilaritem in perpetuum
amisi, mine heart's broken, I shall never look up, or be
merry again, haec jactura intolerabilis, to some parties 'tis
a most intolerable loss. Banishment a great misery, as
Tyrteus describes it in an epigram of his,

"Nam miserum est patria amissa, laribusque vagari
Mendicum, et timida voce rogare cibos:
Omnibus invisus, quocunque accesserit exul
Semper erit, semper spretus egensque jacet," &c.
"A miserable thing 'tis so to wander,
And like a beggar for to whine at door,
Contemn'd of all the world, an exile is,
Hated, rejected, needy still and poor."

Polynices in his conference with Jocasta in Euripides,
reckons up five miseries of a banished man, the least of
which alone were enough to deject some pusillanimous
creatures. Oftentimes a too great feeling of our own
infirmities or imperfections of body or mind, will shrivel us
up; as if we be long sick:

"O beata sanitas, te presentae, amoenum
Ver floret gratiis, absque te nemo beatus:"

O blessed health! "thou art above all gold and treasure,"
Eccles. xxx. 15, the poor man's riches, the rich man's bliss,
without thee there can be no hapiness: or visited with some
loathsome disease, offensive to others, or troublesome to
ourselves; as a stinking breath, deformity of our limbs,
crookedness, loss of an eye, leg, hand, paleness, leanness,
redness, baldness, loss or want of hair, &c., hic ubi fluere
coepit, diros ictus cordi infert, saith Synesius, he himself
troubled not a little ob comae defectum, the loss of hair
alone, strikes a cruel stroke to the heart. Acco, an old
woman, seeing by chance her face in a true glass (for she
used false flattering glasses belike at other times, as most
gentlewomen do), animi dolore in insaniam delapsa est
(Coelius Rhodiginus, l. 17, c. 2), ran mad. Brotheus, the son
of Vulcan, because he was ridiculous for his imperfections,
flung himself into the fire. Lais of Corinth, now grown old,
gave up her glass to Venus, for she could not abide to look
upon it. Qualis sum nolo, qualis cram nequeo. Generally to
fair nice pieces, old age and foul linen are two most odious
things, a torment of torments, they may not abide the thought
of it,

"--- O deorum
Quisquis haec audis, utinam intererrem
Nuda leones,
Antequam turpis macies decentes
Occupat malas, teneraeque succus
Defluat praedaae, speciosa quaero
Pascere tigres."
"Hear me, some gracious heavenly power,
Let lions dire this naked corse devour.
My cheeks ere hollow wrinkles seize,
Ere yet their rosy bloom decays;
While youth yet rolls its vital flood,
Let tigers friendly riot in my blood."

To be foul, ugly, and deformed, much better be buried alive.
Some are fair but barren, and that galls them. "Hannah wept
sore, did not eat, and was troubled in spirit, and all for
her barrenness," 1 Sam. i. and Gen. xxx. Rachel said "in the
anguish of her soul, give me a child, or I shall die:"
another hath too many: one was never married, and that's his
hell, another is, and that's his plague. Some are troubled in
that they are obscure; others by being traduced, slandered,
abused, disgraced, vilified, or any way injured: minime miror
eos (as he said) qui insanire occipiunt ex injuria. I marvel
not at all if offences make men mad. Seventeen particular
causs of anger and offence Aristotle reckons them up, which
for brevity's sake I must omit. No tidings troubles one; ill
reports, rumours, bad tidings or news, hard hap, ill success,
cast in a suit, vain hopes, or hope deferred, another:
expectation, adeo omnibus in rebus molesta semper est
expectatio, as Polybius observes; one is too eminent, another
too base born, and that alone tortures him as much as the
rest: one is out of action, company, employment; another
overcome and tormented with worldly cares, and onerous
business. But what tongue can suffice to speak of all?

Many men catch this malady by eating certain meats, herbs,
roots, at unawares; as henbane, nightshade, cicuta,
mandrakes, &c. A company of young men at Agrigentam in
Sicily, came into a tavern; where after they had freely taken
their liquor, whether it were the wine itself; or something
mixed with it 'tis not yet known, but upon a sudden they
began to be so troubled in their brains, and their phantasy
so crazed, that they thought they were in a ship at sea, and
now ready to be cast away by reason of a tempest. Wherefore
to avoid shipwreck and present drowning, they flung all the
goods in the house out at the windows into the street, or
into the sea, as they supposed; thus they continued mad a
pretty season, and being brought before the magistrate to
give an account of this their fact, they told him (not yet
recovered of their madness) that what was done they did for
fear of death, and to avoid imminent danger: the spectators
were all amazed at this their stupidity, and gazed on them
still, whilst one of the ancientest of the company, in a
grave tone, excused himself to the magistrate upon his knees,
O viri Tritones, ego in imo jacui, I beseech your deities,
&c., for I was in the bottom of the ship all the while:
another besought them as so many sea gods to be good unto
them, and if ever he and his fellows came to land again, he
would build an altar to their service. The magistrate could
not sufficiently laugh at this their madness, bid them sleep
it out, and so went his ways. Many such accidents frequently
happen, upon these unknown occasions. Some are so caused by
philters, wandering in the sun, biting of a mad dog, a blow
on the head, stinging with that kind of spider called
tarantula, an ordinary thing if we may believe Skenck., l. 6.
de Venenis, in Calabria and Apulia in Italy, Cardan., subtil.
l. 9. Scaliger, exercitat. 185. Their symptoms are merrily
described by Jovianus Pontanus, Ant. dial. how they dance
altogether, and are cured by music. Cardan speaks of certain
stones, if they be carried about one, which will cause
melancholy and madness; he calls them unhappy, as an adamant,
selenites, &c., "which dry up the body, increase cares,
diminish sleep:" Ctesias in Persicis, makes mention of a well
in those parts, of which if any man drink, "he is mad for 24
hours?" Some lose their wits by terrible objects (as
elsewhere I have more copiously dilated) and life itself many
times, as Hippolitus affrighted by Neptune's sea-horses,
Athemas by Juno's furies: but these relations are common in
all writers.

"Hic alias poteram, et plures subnectere causas
Sed jumenta vocant, et Sol inclinat, Eundum est."
"Many such causes, much more could I say,
but that for provender my cattle stay:
The sun declines, and I must needs away."

These causes if they be considered, and come alone, I do
easily yield, can do little of themselves, seldom, or apart
(an old oak is not felled at a blow), though many times they
are all sufficient every one: yet if they concur, as often
they do, vis unita fortior; et quae non obsunt singula, multa
nocent, they may batter a strong constitution; as Austin
said, "many grains and small sands sink a ship, many small
drops make a flood," &c., often reiterated; many dispositions
produce an habit.



MEMB. V.

SUBSECT. 1.-- Continent, inward, antecedent, next causes, and
how the Body works on the Mind.


As a purly hunter, I have hitherto beaten about the circuit
of the forest of this microcosm, and followed only those
outward adventitious causes. I will now break into the inner
room, and rip up the antecedent immediate causes which are
there to be found. For as the distraction of the mind,
amongst other outward causes and perturbations, alters the
temperature of the body, so the distraction and distemper of
the body will cause a distemperature of the soul, and 'tis
hard to decide which of these two do more harm to the other.
Plato, Cyprian, and some others, as I have formerly said, lay
the greatest fault upon the soul, excusing the body; others
again accusing the body, excuse the soul, as a principal
agent. Their reasons are, because "the manners do follow the
temperature of the body," as Galen proves it in his book of
that subject, Prosper Calenius de Atra bile, Jason Pratensis,
c. de Mania. Lemnius, l.4. c.16. and many others. And that
which Gualter hath commented, hom. in. epist. Johannis, is
most true; concupiscence and original sin, inclinations, and
bad humours, are radical in every one of us, causing these
perturbations. affections, and several distempers offering
many times violence unto the soul. "Every man is tempted by
his own concupiscence" (James i. 14), the spirit is willing
but the flesh is weak, and rebelleth against the spirit, as
our apostle teacheth us: that methinks the soul hath the
better plea against the body, which so forcibly inclines us,
that we cannot resist, Nec nos obniti contra, nec tendere
tantum sufficimus. How the body being material, worketh upon
the immaterial soul, by mediation of humours and spirits,
which participate of both, and ill-disposed organs, Cornelius
Agrippa hath discoursed, lib. 1. de occult. Philos. cap. 63,
64, 65. Levinus Lemnius, lib. 1. de occult. nat. mir. cap.
12. et 16. et 21. institut. ad opt. vit. Perkins, lib. 1.
Cases of Cons. cap. 12. T. Bright, c. 10, 11, 12. "in his
treatise of melancholy," for as anger, fear, sorrow,
obtrectation, emulation, &c., si mentis intimos recessus
occuparint, saith Lemnius, corpori quoque infesta sunt, et
illi teterrimos morbos inferunt, cause grievous diseases in
the body, so bodily diseases affect the soul by consent. Now
the chiefest causes proceed from the heart, humours, spirits:
as they are purer, or impurer, so is the mind, and equally
suffers, as a lute out of tune, if one string or one organ be
disteinpered, all the rest miscarry, corpus onustum hesternis
vitiis, animum quoque praegravat una. The body is domicilium
animae, her house, abode, and stay; and as a torch gives a
better light, a sweeter smell, according to the matter it is
made of; so doth our soul perform all her actions, better or
worse, as her organs are disposed; or as wine savours of the
cask wherein it is kept; the soul receives a tincture from
the body through which it works. We see this in old men,
children, Europeans; Asians, hot and cold climes; sanguine
are merry; melancholy, sad; phlegmatic, dull; by reason of
abundance of those humours, and they cannot resist such
passions which are inflicted by them. For in this infirmity
of human nature, as Melancthon declares, the understanding is
so tied to, and captivated by his inferior senses, that
without their help he cannot exercise his functions, and the
will being weakened, hath but a small power to restrain those
outward parts, but suffers herself to be overruled by them;
that I must needs conclude with Lemnius, spiritus et humores
maximum nocumentum obtinent, spirits and humours do most harm
in troubling the soul. How should a man choose but be
choleric and angry, that hath his body so dogged with
abundance of gross humours or melancholy, that is so inwardly
disposed? That thence comes then this malady, madness,
apoplexies, lethargies, &c., it may not he denied.

Now this body of ours is most part distempered by some
precedent diseases, which molest his inward organs and
instruments, and so per consequens cause melancholy,
according to the consent of the most approved physicians.
"This humour (as Avicenna, l. 3. Fen. 1. Tract. 4. c. 18.
Arnoldus, breviar. l. 1. 18. Jacchinus, comment. in 9 Rhasis, 
c. 15. Montaltus, c. 10. Nicholas Piso, c. de Melan. &c.,
suppose) is begotten by the distemperature of some inward
part, innate, or left after some inflammation, or else
included in the blood after an ague, or some other malignant
disease." This opinion of theirs concurs with that of Galen,
l. 3. c. 6. de locis afect. Guianerius gives an instance in
one so caused by a quartan ague, and Montanus, consil. 32. in
a young man of twenty eight years of age, so distempered
after a quartan, which had molested him five years together:
Hildesheim, spicel. 2. de Mania, relates of a Dutch baron,
grievously tormented with melancholy after a long ague:
Galen, l. de atra bile, c. 4. puts the plague a cause.
Botaldus in his book de lue vener. c. 2. the French pox for a
cause, others phrensy, epilepsy, apoplexy, because those
diseases do often degenerate into this. Of suppression of
hemorrhoids, haemorrhagia, or bleeding at the nose,
menstruous retentions (although they deserve a larger
explication, as being the sole cause of a proper kind of
melancholy, in more ancient maids, nuns and widows, handled
apart by Rodericus a Castro, and Mercatus, as I have
elsewhere signified), or any other evacuation stopped, I have
already spoken. Only this I will add, that this melancholy
which shall be caused by such infirmities, deserves to be
pitied of all men, and to be respected with a more tender
compassion, according to Laurentius, as coming from a more
inevitable cause.



SUBSECT. II.-- Distemperature of particular Parts, Causes.


THERE is almost no part of the body, which being distempered,
doth not cause this malady, as the brain and his parts,
heart, liver, spleen, stomach, matrix or womb, pylorus,
mirache, mesentery, hypochondries, meseraic veins; and in a
word, saith Arculanus, "there is no part which causeth not
melancholy, either because it is adust, or doth not expel the
superfluity of the nutriment. Savanarola, Pract. major.
rubric. 11. Tract. 6. cap. 1. is of the same opinion, that
melancholy is engendered in each particular part, and Crato
in consil. 17. lib. 2. Gordonius, who is instar omnium, lib.
med. partic. 2. cap. 19. confirms as much, putting the matter
of melancholy, sometimes in the stomach, liver, heart, brain,
spleen, mirache, hypochondries, when as the melancholy humour
resides there, or the liver is not well cleansed "from
melancholy blood."

The brain is a familiar and frequent cause, too hot, or too
cold, "through adust blood so caused," as Mercurialis will
have it, "within or without the head," the brain itself being
distempered. Those are most apt  to this disease that have a
hot heart and moist brain," which Montaltus, cap. 11. de
Melanch. approves out of Halyabbas, Rhasis, and Avicenna.
Mercurialis, consil. 11. assigns the coldness of the brain a
cause, and Salustius Salvianus, med. lect. l. 2. c. 1. will
have it "arise from a cold and dry distemperature of the
brain." Piso, Benedictus Victorius Faventinus, will have it
proceed from a "hot distemperature of the brain;" and
Montaltus, cap. 10. from the brain's heat, scorching the
blood. The brain is still distempered by himself, or by
consent: by himself or his proper affection, as Faventinus
calls it, "or by vapours which arise from the other parts,
and fume up into the head, altering the animal faculties."

Hildesheim, spicel. 2. de Mania, thinks it may be caused from
a "distemperature of the heart; sometimes hot; sometimes
cold." A hot liver, and a cold stomach, are put for usual
causes of melancholy: Mercurialis, consil. 11. et consil. 6.
consil. 86. assigns a hot liver and cold stomach for ordinary
causes. Monavius, in an epistle of his to Crato in Scoltzius,
is of opinion, that hypochondriacal melancholy may proceed
from a cold liver; the question is there discussed. Most
agree that a hot liver is in fault; "the liver is the shop of
humors, and especially causeth melancholy by his hot and dry
distemperature. The stomach and meseraic veins do often
concur, by reason of their obstructions, and thence their
heat cannot be avoided, and many times the matter is so adust
and inflamed in those parts, that it degenerates into
hypochondriacal melancholy." Guianerius, c. 2. Tract. 15.
holds the meseraic veins to be a sufficient cause alone. The
spleen concurs to this malady, by all their consents, and
suppression of hemorrhoids, dum non expurget altera causa
lien, saith Montaltus, if it be "too cold and dry, and do not
purge the other parts as it ought," consil. 23. Montanus puts
the "spleen stopped," for a great cause. Christopherus a Vega
reports of his knowledge, that he hath known melancholy
caused from putrefied blood in those seed-veins and womb;
"Arculanus, from that menstruous blood turned into
melancholy, and seed too long detained (as I have already
declared) by putrefaction or adustion."

The mesenterium, or midriff, diaphragma is a cause which the
Greeks called f?e?a? [phrenai] because by his inflammation
the mind is much troubled with convulsions and dotage. All
these, most part, offend by inflammation, corrupting humours
and spirits, in this non-natural melancholy: for from these
are engendered fuliginous and black spirits. And for that
reason Montaltus cap. 10. de causis melan. will have "the
efficient cause of melancholy to be hot and dry, not a cold
and dry distemperature, as some hold, from the heat of the
brain, roasting the blood, immoderate heat of the liver and
bowels, sad inflammation of the pylorus. And so much the
rather, because that," as Galen holds, "all spices inflame
the blood, solitariness, waking, agues, study, meditation,
all which heat: and therefore he concludes that this
distemperature causing adventitious melancholy is not cold
and dry, but hot and dry." But of this I have sufficiently
treated in the matter of melancholy, and hold that this may
be true in non-natural melancholy, which produceth madness,
but not in that natural, which is more cold, and being
immoderate, produceth a gentle dotage. Which opinion Geraldus
de Solo maintains in his comment upon Rhasis.



SUBSECT. III.-- Causes of Head-Melancholy.

AFTER a tedious discourse of the general causes of
melancholy, I am now returned at last to treat in brief of
the three particular species, and such causes as properly
appertain unto them. Although these causes promiscuously
concur to each and every particular kind, and commonly
produce their effects in that part which is most weak, ill-
disposed, and least able to resist, and so cause all three
species, yet many of them are proper to some one kind, and
seldom found in the rest. As for example, head-melancholy is
commonly caused by a cold or hot distemperature of the brain,
according to Laurentius, cap. 5 de melan. but as Hercules de
Saxonia contends, from that agitation or disttemperature of
the animal spirits alone. Salust. Salvianus, before
mentioned, lib. 2. cap. 3. de re med. will have it proceed
from cold: but that I take of natural melancholy, such as are
fools and dote: for as Galen writes, lib. 4. de puls. 8. and
Avicenna, "a cold and moist brain is an inseparable companion
of folly." But this adventitious melancholy which is here
meant, is caused of a hot and dry distemperature, as
Damascen, the Arabian, lib. 3. cap. 22. thinks, and most
writers: Altomarus and Piso call it "an innate burning
intemperateness, turning blood and choler into melancholy."
Both these opinions may stand good, as Bruel maintains, and
Cappivaccius, si cerebrum sit calidus, "if the brain be hot,
the animal spirits will be hot, and thence comes madness; if
cold, folly." David Crusius, Theat. morb. Hermet. lib. 2.
cap. 6. de atrabilis, grants melancholy to be a disease of an
inflamed brain, but cold notwithstanding of itself: calida
per accidens, frigida per se, hot by accident only; I am of
Capivaccius' mind for my part. Now this humour, according to
Salvianus, is sometimes in the substance of the brain,
sometimes contained in the membranes and tunicles that cover
the brain, sometimes in the passages of the ventricles of the
brain, or veins of those ventricles. It follows many times
"phrensy, long diseases, agues, long abode in hot places, or
under the sun, a blow on the head," as Rhasis informeth us:
Piso adds solitariness, waking, inflammations of the head,
proceeding most part from much use of spices, hot wines, hot
meats: all which Montanus reckons up, consil. 22. for a 
melancholy Jew; and Heurnius repeats, cap. 12. de Mania: hot
baths, garlic, onions, saith Guianerius, bad air, corrupt,
much waking, &c., retention of seed or abundance, stopping of
haemorrhagia, the midriff misaffected; and according to
Trallianus, l. 1. 16. immoderate cares, troubles, griefs,
discontent, study, meditation, and, in a word, the abuse of
all those six non-natural things. Hercules de Saxonia, cap.
16. lib. 1. will have it caused from a cautery, or boil dried
up, or an issue. Amatus Lusitanus, cent. 2. cura. 67. gives
instance in a fellow that had a hole in his arm, "after that
was healed, ran mad, and when the wound was open, he was
cured again." Trincavellius, consil. 13. lib. 1. hath an
example of a melancholy man so caused by overmuch continuance
in the sun, frequent use of venery, and immoderate exercise:
and in his cons. 49. lib. 3. from a headpiece overheated,
which caused head-melancholy. Prosper Calenus brings in
Cardinal Caesius for a pattern of such as are so melancholy
by long study; but examples are infinite.



SUBSECT. IV.-- Causes of Hypochondriacal or Windy Melancholy.


IN repeating of these causes, I must crambem bis coctam
apponere, say that again which I have formerly said, in
applying them to their proper species. Hypochondriacal or
flatuous melancholy, is that which the Arabians call
myrachial, and is in my judgment the most grievous and
frequent, though Bruel and Laurentius make it least
dangerous, and not so hard to be known or cured. His causes
are inward or outward. Inward from divers parts or organs, as
midriff, spleen, stomach, liver, pylorus, womb, diaphragma,
meseraic veins, stopping of issues, etc. Montaltus, cap. 15.
out of Galen recites, "heat and obstruction of those meseraic
veins, as an immediate cause, by which means the passage of
the chilus to the liver is detained, stopped or corrupted,
and turned into rumbling and wind? Montanus, consil. 233,
hath an evident demonstration, Trincavellius another, lib. 1,
cap. 12, and Plater a third, observat. lib. 1, for a doctor
of the law visited with this infirmity, from the said
obstruction and heat of these meseraic veins, and bowels;
quoniam inter ventriculum et jecur venae effervescunt, the
veins are inflamed about the liver and stomach. Sometimes
those other parts are together misaffected; and concur to the
production of this malady: a hot liver and cold stomach, or
cold belly: look for instances in Hollerius, Victor
Trincavellius, consil. 35, l.3, Hildesheim, Spicel. 2, fol.
132, Solenander, consil. 9, pro cive Lugdunensi, Montanus,
consil. 229, for the Earl of Montfort in Germany, 1549, and
Frisimelica in the 233 consultation of the said Montanus. I.
Caesar Claudinus gives instance of a cold stomach and overhot
liver, almost in every consultation, con. 89, for a certain
count; and con. 106, for a Polonian baron, by reason of heat
the blood is inflamed, and gross vapours sent to the heart
and brain. Mercurialis subscribes to them, cons. 89, "the
stomach being misaffected," which he calls the king of the
belly, because if he be distempered, all the rest suffer with
him, as being deprived of their nutriment, or fed with bad
nourishment, by means of which come crudities, obstructions,
wind, rumbling, griping, &c. Hercules de Saxonia, besides
heat, will have the weakness of the liver and his obstruction
a cause, facultatem debilem jecinoris, which he calls the
mineral of melancholy. Laurentius assigns this reason,
because the liver over hot draws the meat undigested out of
the stomach, and burnish the humours. Montanus, cons. 244,
proves that sometimes a cold liver may be a cause.
Laurentius, c. 12, Trincavellius, lib. l2, consil., and
Gualter Bruel, seems to lay the greatest fault upon the
spleen, that doth not his duty in purging the liver as he
ought, being too great, or too little, in drawing too much
blood sometimes to it, and not expelling it, as P.
Cnemiandrus in a consultation of his noted tumorem lienis, he
names it, and the fountain of melancholy. Diodes supposed the
ground of this kind of melancholy to proceed from the
inflammation of the pylorus, which is the nether mouth of the
ventricle. Others assign the mesenterium or midriff
distempered by heat, the womb misaffected, stopping of
haemorrhoids, with many such. All which Laurentius, cap. 12,
reduceth to three, mesentery, liver, and spleen, from whence
he denominates hepatic, splenetic, aud meseraic melancholy.
Outward causes, are bad diet, care, griefs, discontents, and
in a word all those six non-natural things, as Montanus found
by his experience, consil. 244, Solenander, consil. 9, for a
citizen of Lyons, in France, gives his reader to understand
that he knew this mischief procured by a medicine of
cantharides, which an unskilful physician ministered his
patient to drink ad venerem excitandam. But most commonly
fear, grief and some sudden commotion, or perturbation of the
mind, begin it, in such bodies especially as are ill-
disposed. Melancthon, tract. 14, cap. 2. de anima, will have
it as common to men, as the mother to women, upon some
grievous trouble, dislike, passion, or discontent. For as
Camerarius records in his life, Melancthon himself was much
troubled with it, and therefore could speak out of
experience. Montanus, consil. 22, pro delirante Judaeo
confirms it, grievous symptoms of the mind brought him to it.
Randolotius relates of himself, that being one day very
intent to write out a physician's notes, molested by an
occasion, he fell into a hypochondriacal fit, to avoid which
he drank the decoction of wormwood, and was freed. Melancthon
("seeing the disease is so troublesome and frequent) holds it
a most necessary and profitable study, for every man to know
the accidents of it, and a dangerous thing to be ignorant,"
and would therefore have all men in some sort to understand
the causes, symptoms, and cures of it.



SUBSECT. V.-- Causes of Melancholy from the whole Body.


As before, the cause of this kind of melancholy is inward or
outward. Inward, "when the liver is apt to engender such a
humour, or the spleen weak by nature, and not able to
discharge his office." A melancholy temperature, retention of
haemorrhoids, monthly issues, bleeding at nose, long
diseases, agues, and all those six non-natural things
increase it. But especially bad diet, as Piso thinks, pulse,
salt meat, shell-fish, cheese, black wine, &c. Mercurialis
out of Averroes and Avicenna condemns all herbs: Galen, lib.
3. de loc. affect. cap. 7, especially cabbage. So likewise
fear, sorrow, discontents, &c., but of these before. And thus
in brief you have had the general and particular causes of
melancholy.

Now go and brag of thy present happiness, whosoever thou art,
brag of thy temperature, of thy good parts, insult, triumph,
and boast; thou seest in what a brittle state thou art, how
soon thou mayest be dejected, how many several ways, by bad
diet, bad air, a small loss, a little sorrow or discontent,
an ague, &c.; how many sudden accidents may procure thy ruin,
what a small tenure of happiness thou hast in this life, how
weak and silly a creature thou art. "Humble thyself;
therefore, under the mighty hand of God," 1 Peter, v. 6. know
thyself; acknowledge thy present misery, and make right use
of it. Qui stat videat ne cadat. Thou dost now flourish, and
hast bona animi, corporis, et fortunae, goods of body, mind,
and fortune, nescis quid serus secum vesper ferat, thou
knowest not what storms and tempests the late evening may
bring with it. Be not secure then, "be sober and watch,"
fortunam reverenter habe, if fortunate and rich; if sick and
poor, moderate thyself. I have said.



SECT. III. MEMB. I.

SUBSECT. I.-- Symptoms, or Signs of Melancholy in the Body.


PARRHASIUS, a painter of Athens, amongst those Olynthian
captives Philip of Macedon brought home to sell, bought one
very old man; and when he had him at Athens, put him to
extreme torture and torment, the better by his example to
express the pains and passions of his Prometheus, whom he was
then about to paint. I need not be so barbarous, inhuman,
curious, or cruel, for this purpose to torture any poor
melancholy man, their symptoms are plain, obvious and
familiar, there needs no such accurate observation or far-
fetched object, they delineate themselves, they voluntarily
betray themselves, they are too frequent in all places, I
meet them still as I go, they cannot conceal it, their
grievances are too well known, I need not seek far to
describe them.

Symptoms therefore are either universal or particular, saith
Gordonius, lib. med. cap. 19, part. 2, to persons, to
species: "some signs are secret, some manifest, some in the
body, some in the mind, and diversely vary, according to the
inward or outward causes," Cappivaccius: or from stars,
according to Jovianus Pontanus, de reb. coelest. lib. 10.
cap. 13, and celestial influences, or from the humours
diversely mixed, Ficinus, lib. 1, cap. 4, de sanit. tuenda:
as they are hot, cold, natural, unnatural, intended or
remitted, so will Aetius have melancholica deliria
multiformia, diversity of melancholy signs. Laurentius
ascribes them to their several temperatures, delights,
natures, inclinations, continuance of time, as they are
simple or mixed with other diseases, as the causes are
divers, so must the signs be almost infinite, Altomarus, cap.
7. art. med. And as wine produceth divers effects, or that
herb Tortocolla in Laurentius, "which makes some laugh, some
weep, some sleep, some dance, some sing, some howl, some
drink," &c., so doth this our melancholy humour work several
signs in several parties.

But to confine them, these general symptoms may be reduced to
those of the body or the mind. Those usual signs appearing in
the bodies of such as are melancholy, be these cold and dry,
or they are hot and dry, as the humour is more or less adust.
From these first qualities arise many other second, as that
of colour black, swarthy, pale, ruddy, &c., some are impense
rubri, as Montaltus, cap. 16, observes out of Galen, lib. 3,
de locis affectis, very red and high coloured. Hippocrates in
his book de insania et melan. reckons up these signs, that
they are "lean, withered, hollow-eyed, look old, wrinkled,
harsh, much troubled with wind, and a griping in their
bellies, or belly-ache, belch often, dry bellies and hard,
dejected looks, flaggy beards, singing of the ears, vertigo,
light-headed, little or no sleep, and that interrupt,
terrible and fearful dreams," Anna soror, quae me suspensam
insomnia terrent? The same symptoms are repeated by
Melanelius in his book of melancholy collected out of Galen,
Buffus, Aetius, by Rhasis, Gordonius, and all the juniors,
"continual, sharp, and stinking belchings, as if their meat
in their stomachs were putrefied, or that they had eaten
fish, dry bellies, absurd and interrupt dreams, and many
phantastical visions about their eyes, vertiginous, apt to
tremble, and prone to venery." Some add palpitation of the
heart, cold sweat, as usual symptoms, and a leaping in many
parts of the body, saltum in multis corporis partibus, a kind
of itching, saith Laurentius, on the superficies of the skin,
like a flea-biting sometimes. Montaltus, cap. 21. puts fixed
eyes and much twinkling of their eyes for a sign, and so doth
Avicenna, oculos habentes palpitantes, tremuli, vehementer
rubicundi, &c., lib. 3. Fen. 1. Tract. 4. cap. 18. They stut
most part, which he took out of Hippocrates' aphorisms.
Rhasis makes "head-ache and a binding heaviness for a
principal token, much leaping of wind about the skin, as well
as stutting, or tripping in speech, &c., hollow eyes, gross
veins, and broad lips." To some too, if they be far gone,
mimical gestures are too familiar, laughing, grinning,
fleering, murmuring, talking to themselves, with strange
mouths and faces, articulate voices, exclamations, &c. And
although they be commonly lean, hirsute, uncheerful in
countenance, withered, and not so pleasant to behold, by
reason of those continual fears, griefs, and vexations, dull,
heavy, lazy, restless, unapt to go about any business; yet 
their memories are most part good, they have happy wits, and
excellent apprehensions. Their hot and dry brains make them
they cannot sleep, Ingentes habent et erebras vigilias
(Areteus), mighty and oft-watchings, sometimes waking for a
month, a year together. Hercules de Saxonia faithfully
averreth, that he hath heard his mother swear, she slept not
for seven months together: Trincavellius, Tom. 2. cons. 16.
speaks of one that waked 50 days, and Skenckius hath examples
of two years, and all without offence. In natural actions
their appetite is greater than their concoction, multa
appetunt, pauca digerunt, as Rhasis hath it, they covet to
eat, but cannot digest. And although they "do eat much, yet
they are lean, ill-liking," saith Areteus, "withered and
hard, much troubled with costiveness," crudities,
oppilations, spitting, belching, &c. Their pulse is rare and
slow, except it be of the Carotides, which is very strong;
but that varies according to their intended passions or
perturbations, as Struthius hath proved at large. Spigmaticae
artis, l. 4. c. 13. To say truth, in such chronic diseases
the pulse is not much to be respected, there being so much
superstition in it, as Crato notes, and so many differences
in Galen, that he dares say they may not be observed, or
understood of any man.

Their urine is most part pale, and low coloured, urina pauca,
acris, biliosa, (Areteus), not much in quantity; but this, in
my judgment, is all out as uncertain as the other, varying so
often according to several persons, habits, and other
occasions not to be respected in chronic diseases. "Their
melancholy excrements in some very much, in others little, as
the spleen plays his part," and thence proceeds wind,
palpitation of the heart, short breath, plenty of humidity in
the stomach, heaviness of heart and heartache, and
intolerable stupidity and dulness of spirits. Their
excrements or stool hard, black to some and little. If the
heart, brain, liver, spleen, be misaffected, as usually they
are, many inconveniences proceed from them, many diseases
accompany, as incubus, apoplexy, epilepsy, vertigo, those
frequent wakings and terrible dreams, intempestive laughing,
weeping, sighing, sobbing, bashfulness, blushing, trembling,
sweating, swooning, &c. All their senses are troubled, they
think they see, hear, smell, and touch that which they do
not, as shall be proved in the following discourse.



SUBSECT. II.-- Symptoms or Signs in the Mind.


Fear.] ARCULANUS in 9 Rhasis ad Almansor. cap. 16. will have
these symptoms to be infinite, as indeed they are, varying
according to the parties, "for scarce is there one of a
thousand that dotes alike," Laurentius, c. 16. Some few of
greater note I will point at; and amongst the rest, fear and
sorrow, which as they are frequent causes, so if they
persevere long, according to Hippocrates and Galen's
aphorisms, they are most assured signs, inseparable
companions, and characters of melancholy; of present
melancholy and habituated, saith Montaltus, cap. 11. and
common to them all, as the said Hippocrates, Galen, Avicenna,
and all Neoterics hold. But as hounds many times run away
with a false cry, never perceiving themselves to be at a
fault, so do they. For Diocles of old (whom Galen confutes),
and amongst the juniors, Hercules de Saxonia, with Lod.
Mercatus, cap. 17. l. 1. de melan. take just exceptions at
this aphorism of Hippocrates, 'tis not always true, or so
generally to be understood, "fear and sorrow are no common
symptoms to all melancholy; upon more serious consideration,
I find some (saith he) that are not so at all. Some indeed
are sad, and not fearful; some fearful and not sad; some
neither fearful nor sad; some both." Four kinds he excepts,
fanatical persons, such as were Cassandra, Nanto, Nicostrata,
Mopsus, Proteus, the Sybils, whom Aristotle confesseth to
have been deeply melancholy. Baptista Porta seconds him,
Physiog. lib. 1. cap. 8, they were atra bile perciti:
daemoniacal persons, and such as speak strange languages, are
of this rank: some poets, such as laugh always, and think
themselves kings, cardinals, &c., sanguine they are,
pleasantly disposed most part, and so continue. Baptista
Porta confines fear and sorrow to them that are cold; but
lovers, sybils, enthusiasts, he wholly excludes. So that I
think I may truly conclude, they are not always sad and
fearful, but usually so: and that "without a cause, timent de
non timendis (Gordonius), quaeque momenti non sunt, "although
not all alike (saith Altomarus), yet all likely fear, some
with an extraordinary and a mighty fear," Areteus. "Many fear
death, and yet in a contrary humour, make away themselves,"
Galen, lib. 3. de loc. affect. cap. 7. Some are afraid that
heaven will fall on their heads: some they are damned, or
shall be. "They are troubled with scruples of consciences,
distrusting God's mercies, think they shall go certainly to
hell, the devil will have them, and make great lamentation,"
Jason Pratensis. Fear of devils, death, that they shall be so
sick of some such or such disease, ready to tremble at every
object, they shall die themselves forthwith, or that some of
their dear friends or near allies are certainly dead;
imminent danger, loss, disgrace, still torment others, &c.;
that they are all glass, and therefore will suffer no man to
come near them: that they are all cork, as light as feathers;
others as heavy as lead; some are afraid their heads will
fall off their shoulders, that they have frogs in their
bellies, &c. Montanus, Consil. 23, speaks of one "that durst
not walk alone from home, for fear he should swoon or die." A
second "fears every man he meets will rob him, quarrel with
him, or kill him." A third dares not venture to walk alone,
for fear he should meet the devil, a thief, be sick; fears
all old women as witches, and every black dog or cat he sees
he suspecteth to be a devil, every person comes near him is
malificiated, every creature, all intend to hurt him, seek
his ruin; another dares not go over a bridge, come near a
pool, rock, steep hill, lie in a chamber where cross beams
are, for fear he be tempted to hang, drown, or precipitate
himself. If he be in a silent auditory, as at a sermon, he is
afraid he shall speak aloud at unawares, something indecent,
unfit to be said. If he be locked in a close room, he is
afraid of being stifled for want of air, and still carries
biscuit, aquavitae, or some strong waters about him, for fear
of deliquiums, or being sick; or if he be in a throng, middle
of a church, multitude, where he may not well get out, though
he sit at ease, he is so misaffected. He will freely promise,
undertake any business beforehand, but when it comes to be
performed, he dare not adventure, but fears an infinite
number of dangers, disasters, &c. Some are "afraid to be
burned, or that the ground will sink under them, or swallow
them quick, or that the king will call them in question for
some fact they never did (Rhasis cont.) and that they shall
surely be executed." The terror of such a death troubles
them, and they fear as much and are equally tormented in
mind, "as they that have committed a murder, and are pensive
without a cause, as if they were now presently to be put to
death." Plater, cap. 3. de mentis alienat. They are afraid of
some loss, danger, that they shall surely lose their lives,
goods, and all they have, but why they know not.
Trincavellius, consil. 13. lib. 1. had a patient that would
needs make away himself; for fear of being hanged, and could
not be persuaded for three years together, but that he had
killed a man. Plater, observat. lib. 1. hath two other
examples of such as feared to be executed without a cause. If
they come in a place where a robbery, theft, or any such
offence hath been done, they presently fear they are
suspected, and many times betray themselves without a cause.
Lewis XI., the French king, suspected every man a traitor
that came about him, durst trust no officer. Alii formidolosi
omnium, alii quorundam (Fracastorius, lib. 2. de Intellect.)
"some fear all alike, some certain men, and cannot endure
their companies, are sick in them, or if they be from home."
Some suspect treason still, others "are afraid of their
dearest and nearest friends." (Melanelius a Galeno, Ruff,
Aetio,) and dare not be alone in the dark for fear of
hobgoblins and devils: he suspects every thing he hears or
sees to be a devil, or enchanted, and imagineth a thousand
chimeras and visions, which to his thinking he certainly
sees, bugbears, talks with black men, ghosts, goblins, &c.,
Omnes se terrent aurae, sonus excitat omnis. Another through
bashfulness, suspicion, and timorousness, will not he seen
abroad, "loves darkness as life, and cannot endure the
light," or to sit in lightsome places, his hat still in his
eyes, he will neither see nor be seen by his goodwill,
Hippocrates, lib. de Insania et Melancholia. He dare not come
in company for fear he should be misused, disgraced,
overshoot himself in gesture or speeches, or be sick; he
thinks every man observes him, aims at him, derides him, owes
him malice. Most part "they are afraid they are bewitched,
possessed, or poisoned by their enemies, and sometimes they
suspect their nearest friends: he thinks something speaks or
talks with him, or to him, and he belcheth of the poison."
Christopherus a Vega, lib. 2. cap. 1. had a patient so
troubled, that by no persuasion or physic he could be
reclaimed. Some are afraid that they shall have every fearful
disease they see others have, hear of, or read, and dare not
therefore bear or read of any such subject, no not of
melancholy itself; lest by applying to themselves that which
they hear or read, they should aggravate and increase it. If
they see one possessed, bewitched, an epileptic paroxysm, a
man shaking with the palsy, or giddy-headed, reeling or
standing in a dangerous place, &c., for many days after it
runs in their minds, they are afraid they shall be so too,
they are in like danger, as Perk. c. 12. sc. 2. well observes
in his Cases of Consc., and many times by violence of
imagination they produce it. They cannot endure to see any
terrible object, as a monster, a man executed, a carcase,
hear the devil named, or any tragical relation seen, but they
quake for fear, Hecatas somniare sibi videntur (Lucian), they
dream of hobgoblins, and may not get it out of their minds a
long time after: they apply (as I have said) all they hear,
see, read, to themselves; as Felix Plater notes of some young
physicians, that study to cure diseases, catch them
themselves, will be sick, and appropriate all symptoms they
find related of others, to their own persons. And therefore
(quod iterum moneo, licet nauseam paret lectori, malo decem
potius verba, decies repetita licet, abundare, quam unum
desiderari) I would advise him that is actually melancholy
not to read this tract of Symptoms, lest he disquiet or make
himself for a time worse, and more melancholy than he was
before. Generally of them all take this, de inanibus semper
conqueruntur et timent, saith Areteus: they complain of toys,
and fear without a cause and still think their melancholy to
be most grievous, none so bad as they are, though it be
nothing in respect, yet never any man sure was so troubled,
or in this sort. As really tormented and perplexed, in as
great an agony for toys and trifles (such things as they will
after laugh at themselves) as if they were most material and
essential matters indeed, worthy to be feared, and will not
be satisfied. Pacify them for one, they are instantly
troubled with some other fear; always afraid of something
which they foolishly imagine or conceive to themselves, which
never peradventure was, never can be, never likely will be;
troubled in mind upon every small occasion, unquiet, still
complaining, grieving, vexing, suspecting, grudging,
discontent, and cannot be freed so long as melancholy
continues. Or if their minds be more quiet for the present,
and they free from foreign fears, outward accidents, yet
their bodies are out of tune, they suspect some part or other
to be amiss, now their head aches, heart, stomach, spleen,
&c. is misaffected, they shall surely have this or that
disease; still troubled in body, mind, or both, and through
wind, corrupt fantasy, some accidental distemper, continually
molested. Yet for all this, as Jacchinus notes, "in all other
things they are wise, staid, discreet and do nothing
unbeseeming their dignity, person, or place, this foolish,
ridiculous, and childish fear excepted; which so much, so
continually tortures and crucifies their souls, like a
barking dog that always bawls, but seldom bites, this fear
ever molesteth, and so long as melancholy lasteth, cannot be
avoided."

Sorrow is that other character, and inseparable companion, as
individual as Saint Cosmus and Damian, fidus Achates, as all
writers witness, a common symptom, a continual, and still
without any evident cause, maerent omnes, et si roges eos
reddere causam, non possunt: grieving still, but why they
cannot tell: Agelasti, moesti, cogitabundi, they look as if
they had newly come forth of Trophonius' den. And though they
laugh many times, and seem to be extraordinary merry (as they
will by fits), yet extreme lumpish again in an instant, dull
and heavy, semel et simul, merry and sad, but most part sad:
Si qua placent, abeunt; inimica tenacius haerent: sorrow
sticks by them still continually, gnawing as the vulture did
Titius' bowels, and they cannot avoid it, No sooner are their
eyes open, but after terrible and troublesome dreams their
heavy hearts begin to sigh: they are still fretting, chafing,
sighing, grieving, complaining, finding faults, repining,
grudging, weeping, Heautontimorumenoi, vexing themselves,
disquieted in mind, with restless, unquiet thoughts,
discontent, either for their own, other men's or public
affairs, such as concern them not; things past, present, or
to come, the remembrance of some disgrace, loss, injury,
abuses, &c. troubles them now being idle afresh, as if it
were new done; they are afflicted otherwise for some danger,
loss, want, shame, misery, that will certainly come, as they
suspect and mistrust. Lugubris Ate frowns upon them, insomuch
that Areteus well calls it angorem animi, a vexation of the
mind, a perpetual agony. They can hardly be pleased or eased,
though in other men's opinion most happy, go, tarry, run,
ride, -- post equitens sedet atra cura: they cannot avoid
this feral plague, let them come in what company they will,
haeret lateri lethalis arundo, as to a deer that is struck,
whether he run, go, rest with the herd, or alone, this grief
remains: irresolution, inconstancy, vanity of mind, their
fear, torture, care, jealousy, suspicion, &c., continues, and
the cannot be relieved. So he complained in the poet,

"Domum revertur maetus, atque animo fere
Perturbato, atque incerto, prae aegritudine,
Assido, accurunt servi: soccos detrahunt,
Video alios festinare, lectos sternere,
Coenam apparare, pro se quisque sedulo
Faciebant, quo illam mihi lenirent miseriam."

"He came home sorrowful, and troubled in his mind, his
servants did all they possibly could to please him; one
pulled off his socks, another made ready his bed, a third his
supper, all did their utmost endeavours to ease his grief,
and exhilarate his person, he was profoundly melancholy, he
had lost his son, illud angebat,that was his Cordolium, his
pain, his agony which could not be removed."

Taedium vitae.] Hence it proceeds many times, that they are
weary of their lives, and feral thoughts to offer violence to
their own persons come into their minds, taedium vitae is a
common symptom, tarda fluunt, ingrataque tempora, they are
soon tired with all things; they will now tarry, now be gone;
now in bed they will rise, now up, then go to bed, now
pleased, then again displeased; now they like, by and by
dislike all, weary of all, sequitur nunc vivendi, nunc
moriendi cupido, saith Aurelianus, lib. 1. cap. 6, but most
part vitam damnant, discontent, disquieted, perplexed upon
every light, or no occasion, object: often tempted, I say, to
make away themselves: Vivere nolunt, mori nesciunt: they
cannot die, they will not live: they complain, weep, lament,
and think they lead a most miserable life, never was any man 
so bad, or so before, every poor man they see is most
fortunate in respect of them, every beggar that comes to the
door is happier than they are, they could be contented to
change lives with them, especially if they be alone, idle,
and parted from their ordinary company, molested, displeased,
or provoked: grief, fear, agony, discontent, wearisomeness,
laziness, suspicion, or some such; passion forcibly seizeth
on them. Yet by and by when they come in company again, which
they like, or be pleased, suam sententiam rursus damnant, et
vitae solatio delectantur, as Octavius Horatianus observes,
lib. 2. cap. 5, they condemn their former dislike, and are
well pleased to live. And so they continue, till with some
fresh discontent they be molested again, and then they are
weary of their lives, weary of all, they will die, and show
rather a necessity to live, than a desire. Claudius the
emperor, as Sueton describes him, had a spice of this
disease, for when he was tormented with the pain of his
stomach, he had a conceit to make away himself.  Julius
Caesar Claudinus, consil. 84. had a Polonian to his patient,
so affected, that through fear and sorrow, with which he was
still disquieted, hated his own life, wished for death every
moment, and to be freed of his misery. Mercurialis another,
and another that was often minded to dispatch himself, and so
continued for many years.

Suspicion, jealousy.] Suspicion, and jealousy, are general
symptoms: they are commonly distrustful, apt to mistake, and
amplify, facile irascibiles, testy, pettish, peevish, and
ready to snarl upon every small occasion, cum amicissimis,
and without a cause, datum vel non datum, it will be
scandalum acceptum. If they speak in jest, he takes it in
good earnest. If they be not saluted, invited, consulted
with, called to counsel, &c., or that any respect, small
compliment, or ceremony be omitted, they think themselves
neglected, and contemned; for a time that tortures them. If
two talk together, discourse, whisper, jest, or tell a tale
in general, he thinks presently they mean him, applies all to
himself de se putat omnia dici. Or if they talk with him, he
is ready to misconstrue every word they speak, and interpret
it to the worst; he cannot endure any man to look steadily on
him, speak to him almost, laugh, jest, or be familiar, or
hem, or point, cough, or spit, or make a  noise sometimes,
&c. He thinks they laugh or point at him, or do it in
disgrace of him, cirumvent him, contemn him, every man looks
at him, he is pale, red, sweats for fear and anger lest
somebody should observe him. He works upon it, and long after
this false conceit of an abuse troubles him.  Montanus,
consil. 22. gives instance in a melancholy Jew, that was
Iracundior Adria, so waspish and suspicious, tam facile
iratus, that no man could tell how to carry himself in his
company.

Inconstancy.] Inconstant they are in all their action;
vertiginous, restless, unapt to resolve of any business, they
will and will not, persuaded to and fro upon every small
occasion, or word spoken: and yet if once they be resolved,
obstinate, hard to be reconciled. If they abhor, dislike, or
distaste, once settled, though to the better by odds, by no
counsel, or persuasion to be removed. Yet in most things
wavering, irresolute, unable to deliberate, through fear,
faciunt, et mox facti poenitunt (Areteus), avari, et paulo
post prodigi. Now prodigal, and then covetous, they do, and
by-and-by repent them of that which they have done, so that
both ways they are troubled, whether they do or do not, want
or have, hit or miss, disquieted of all hands, soon weary,
and still seeking change, restless, I say, fickle, fugitive,
they may not abide to tarry in one place long.

"Romae rus optans, absentem rusticus urbem
Tollit ad astra --"
(Hor. "At Rome, wishing for the fields; in the country,
extolling the city to the skies.")

no company long, or to persevere in any action or business.

"Et similis regum pueris, pappare minutum
Poscit, et iratus mammae lallare recusat."
(Pers. Sat. 3. 18. "And like the children of nobility,
require to eat pap, and, angry at the nurse, refuse her to
sing lullaby.")

eftsoons pleased, and anon displeased, as a man that's bitten
with fleas, or that cannot sleep turns to and fro in his bed,
their restless minds are tossed and vary, they have no
patience to read out a book, to play out a game or two, walk
a mile, sit an hour, &c., erected and dejected in an instant;
animated to undertake, and upon a word spoken again
discouraged.

Passionate.] Extreme passionate, Quicquid volunt valde
volunt; and what they desire, they do most furiously seek:
anxious ever and very solicitous, distrustful, and timorous,
envious, malicious, profuse one while, sparing another, but
most part covetous, muttering, repining, discontent, and
still complaining, grudging, peevish, injuriarum tenaces,
prone to revenge, soon troubled, and most violent in all
their imaginations, not affable in speech, or apt to vulgar
compliment, but surly, dull, sad, austere; cogitabundi still,
very intent, and as Albertus Durer paints melancholy, like a
sad woman leaning on her arm with fixed looks, neglected
habit, &c., held therefore by some proud, soft, sottish, or
half-mad, as the Abderites esteemed of Democritus: and yet of
a deep reach, excellent apprehension, judicious, wise, and
witty: for I am of that nobleman's mind, "Melancholy
advanceth men's conceits, more than any humour whatsoever,"
improves their meditations more than any strong drink or
sack. They are of profound judgment in some things, although
in others non recte judicant inquieti, saith Fracastorius,
lib. 2. de Intell. And as Arculanus, c. 16. in 9. Rhasis
terms it, Judicium plerumque perversum corrupti, cum judicant
honesta inhonesta, at amicitam habent pro inimicitia: they
count honesty dishonesty, friends as enemies, they will abuse
their best friends, and dare not offend their enemies.
Cowards most part et ad inferendiam injuriam timidissimi
saith Cardan, lib. 8. cap. 4. de rerum varietate: loth to
offend, and if they chance to overshoot themselves in word or
deed: or any small business or circumstance be omitted,
forgotten, they are miserably tormented, and frame a thousand
dangers and inconveniences to themselves, ex musca
elephantem, if once they conceit it: overjoyed with every
good rumour, tale, or prosperous event, transported beyond
themselves: with every small cross again, bad news,
misconceived injury, loss, danger, afflicted beyond measure,
in great agony, perplexed, dejected, astonished, impatient,
utterly undone: fearful, suspicious of all. Yet again, many
of them desperate harebrains, rash, careless, fit to be
assassins, as being void of all fear and sorrow, according to
Hercules de Saxonia, "Most audacious, and such as dare walk
alone in the night, through deserts and dangerous places,
fearing none."

Amorous.] "They are prone to love," and easy to be taken;
Propensi ad amorem et excandescentiam (Montaltus, cap. 2l),
quickly enamoured, and dote upon all, love one dearly, till
they see another, and then dote on her, Et hanc, et hanc, et
illam, et omnes, the present moves most, and the last
commonly they love best. Yet some again Anterotes, cannot
endure the sight of a woman, abhor the sex, as that same
melancholy duke of Muscovy, that was instantly sick if he
came but in sight of them; and that Anchorite, that fell into
a cold palsy when a woman was brought before him.

Humorous.] Humorous they are beyond all measure, sometimes
profusely laughing, extraordinarily merry, and then again
weeping without a cause (which is familiar with many
gentlewomen), groaning, sighing, pensive, sad, almost
distracted, multa absurda fingunt, et a ratione aliena (saith
Frambesarius), they feign many absurdities, vain, void of
reason: one supposeth himself to be a dog, cock, bear, horse,
glass, butter, &c. He is a giant, a dwarf; as strong as an
hundred men, a lord, duke, prince, &c. And if he be told he
hath a stinking breath, a great nose, that he is sick, or
inclined to such or such a disease, he believes it eftsoons,
and peradventure by force of imagination will work it out.
Many of them are immovable, and fixed in their conceit;
others vary upon every object, heard or seen. If they see a
stage-play, they run upon that a week after; if they hear
music,or see dancing, they have nought but bagpipes in their
brain; if they see a combat, they are all for arms. "If
abused, an abuse troubles them long after; if crossed, that
cross, &c. Restless in their thoughts and actions,
continually meditating, Velet aegri somnia, vanae finguntur
species; more like dreams, than men awake, they fain a
company of antic, fantastical conceits, they have most
frivolous thoughts, impossible to be effected; and sometimes
think verily they hear and see present before their eyes such
phantasms or goblins, they fear, suspect, or conceive, they
still talk with, and follow them. In fine, cogitationes
somniantibus similes, id vigilant, quod alli somniant
cogitabundi: still, saith Avicenna, they wake, as others
dream, and such for the most part are their imaginations and
conceits, absurd, vain, foolish toys, yet they are most
curious and solicitous, continual, et supra modum, Rhasis,
cont. lib. 1. cap. 9. praemeditantur de aliqua re. As serious
in a toy, as if it were a most necessary business, of great
moment, importance, and still, still, still thinking of it:
saeviunt in se, macerating themselves. Though they do talk
with you, and seem to be otherwise employed, and to your
thinking very intent and busy, still that toy runs in their
mind, that fear, that suspicion, that abuse, that jealousy,
that agony, that vexation, that cross, that castle in the
air, that crotchet, that whimsy, that fiction, that pleasant
waking dream, whatsoever it is. Nec interrogant (saith
Fracastorius) nec irrogatis recte respondent. They do not
much heed what you say, their mind is on another matter; ask
what you will, they do not attend, or much intend that
business they are about, but forget themselves what they are
saying, doing, or should otherwise say or do, whither they
are going, distracted with their own melancholy thoughts. One
laughs upon a sudden, another smiles to himself, a third
frowns, calls, his lips go still, he acts with his hand as he
walks, &c. 'Tis proper to all melancholy men, saith
Mercurialis, con. 11. "What conceit they have once
entertained, to be most intent, violent, and continually
about it." Invitus occurrit, do what they may they cannot be
rid of it, against their wills they must think of it a
thousand times over, Perpetuo molestantur nec oblivisci
possunt, they are continually troubled with it, in company,
out of company; at meat, at exercise, at all times and
places, non desinunt ea, quae minime volunt, cogitare, if it
be offensive especially, they cannot forget it, they may not
rest or sleep for it, but still tormenting themselves,
Sysiphi saxum volvunt sibi ipsis, as Bruner observes,
Perpetua calamitas et miserabile flagellum.

Bashfulness] Crato, Laurentius, and Fernelius, put
bashfulness for an ordinary symptom, subrusticus pudor, or
vitiosus pudor, is a thing which much haunts and torments
them. If they have been misused, derided, disgraced, chidden,
&c., or by any perturbation of mind misaffected, it so far
troubles them, that they become quite moped many times and so
disheartened, dejected, they dare not come abroad, into
strange companies especially, or manage their ordinary
affairs, so childish, timorous, and bashful, they can look no
man in the face; some are more disquieted in this kind, some
less, longer some, others shorter, by fits, &c., though some
on the other side (according to Fracastorius) be inverecundi
et pertinaces, impudent and peevish. But most part the are
very shamefaced, and that makes them with Pet. Blesensis,
Christopher Urswick, and many such, to refuse honours,
offices and preferments, which sometimes fall into their
mouths, they cannot speak, or put forth themselves as others
can, timor hos, pudor impedit illos, timorousness and 
bashfulness hinder their proceedings, they are contented with
their present estate, unwilling to undertake any office, and
therefore never likely to rise. For that cause they seldom
visit their friends, except some familiars: pauciloqui, of
few words, and oftentimes wholly silent. Frambeserius, a
Frenchman, had two such patients, omnino taciturnos, their
friends could not get them to speak: Rodericus a Fonseca,
consult. tom. 2. 85. consil. gives instance in a young man,
of twenty-seven years of age, that was frequently silent,
bashful, moped, solitary, that would not eat his meat, or
sleep, and yet again by fits apt to be angry, &c.

Solitariness.] Most part they are, as Plater notes, desides,
taciturni, aegre impulsi nec nisi coacti procedunt, &c., they
will scarce be compelled to do that which concerns them,
though it be for their good, so diffident, so dull, of small
or no compliment, unsociable, hard to be acquainted with,
especially of strangers; they had rather write their minds
than speak, and above all things love solitariness. Ob
voluptatem, an ob timorem soli sunt? Are they so solitary for
pleasure (one asks) or pain? for both; yet I rather think for
fear and sorrow, &c.

"Hinc metuunt cupiuntque, dolent fugiuntque, nec auras
Respiciunt, clausi tenebris, et carcere caeco."
"Hence they they grieve and fear, avoiding light,
And shut themselves in prison dark from sight."

As Bellerophon in Homer,

"Qui miser in sylvis moerens errabat opacis,
Ipse suum cor edens, hominum vestigia vitans."
"That wandered in the woods, sad, all alone,
Forsaking men's society, making great moan."

They delight in floods and waters, desert places, to walk
alone in orchards, gardens, private walks, back lanes, averse
from company, as Diogenes in his tub, or Timon Misanthropus,
they abhor all companions at last, even their nearest
acquaintances and most familiar friends, for they have a
conceit (I say) every man observes them, will deride, laugh
to scorn, or misuse them, confining themselves therefore
wholly to their private houses or chambers fugiunt homines
sine causa (saith Rhasis) et odio habent, cont. l. 1. c. 9.
they will diet themselves, feed and live alone. It was one of
the chiefest reasons why the citizens of Abdera suspected
Democritus to be melancholy and mad, because that, as
Hippocrates related in his epistle to Philopoemnes, "he
forsook the city, lived in groves and hollow trees, upon a
green bank by a brook side or confluence of waters all day
long, and all night." Quae quidem (saith he) plurimum atra
bile vexatis et melancholicis eveniunt, deserta frequentant,
hominumque congressum aversantur; which is an ordinary thing
with melancholy men. The Egyptians therefore in their
hieroglyphics expressed a melancholy man by a hare sitting in
her form, as being a most timorous and solitary creature,
Pierius, Hieroglyph. l. 12. But this, and all precedent
symptoms, are more or less apparent, as the humour is
intended or remitted, hardly perceived in some, or not at
all, most manifest in others. Childish in some, terrible in
others; to be derided in one, pitied or admired in another;
to him by fits, to a second continuate: and howsoever these
symptoms be common and incident to all persons, yet they are
the more remarkable, frequent, furious and violent in
melancholy men. To speak in a word, there is nothing so vain,
absurd, ridiculous, extravagant, impossible, incredible, so
monstrous a chimera, so prodigious and strange, such as
painters and poets durst not attempt, which they will not
really fear, feign, suspect and imagine unto themselves: and
that which Lod. Viv. said in a jest of a silly country
fellow, that killed his ass for drinking up the moon, ut
lunam mundo redderet, you may truly say of them in earnest;
they will act, conceive all extremes, contrarieties, and
contradictions, and that in infinite varieties. Melancholici
plane incredibilia sibi persuadent, ut vix omnibus saeculis
duo reperti sint, qui idem imaginati sint (Erastus de
Landis), scarce two of two thousand that concur in the same
symptoms. The tower of Babel never yielded such confusion of
tongues, as the chaos of melancholy doth variety of symptoms.
There is in all melancholy, similitudo dissimilis, like men's
faces, a disagreeing likeness still; and as in a river we
swim in the same place, though not in the same numerical
water; as the same instrument affords several lessons, so the
same disease yields diversity of symptoms. Which howsoever
they be diverse, intricate, and hard to be confined, I will
adventure yet in such a vast confusion and generality to
bring them into some order; and so descend to particulars.



SUBSECT. III.-- Particular Symptoms from the influence of
Stars, parts of the Body, and Humours.


Some men have peculiar symptoms, according to their
temperament and crisis, which they had from the stars and
those celestial influences, variety of wits and dispositions,
as Anthony Zara contends, Anat. ingen. sect. 1. memb. 11. 12,
13, 14, plurimum irritant influentiae coelestes, unde cientur
animi aegritudines et morbi corporum. One saith, diverse
diseases of the body and mind proceed from their influences,
as I have already proved out of Ptolemy, Puntanus, Lemnius,
Cardan, and others, as they are principal significators of
manners, diseases, mutually irradiated, or lords of the
geniture, &c. Ptolomeus in his centiloquy, Hermes, or
whosoever else the author of that tract, attributes all these
symptoms, which are in melancholy men, to celestial
influences; which opinion, Mercurialis de affect. lib. cap.
10. rejects; but, as I say, Jovianus Pontanus and others
stiffly defend. That some are solitary, dull, heavy,
churlish; some again blithe, buxom, light, and merry, they
ascribe wholly to the stars. As if Saturn be predominant in
his nativity, and cause melancholy in his temperature, then
he shall be very austere, sullen, churlish, black of colour,
profound in his cogitations, full of cares, miseries, and
discontents, sad and fearful, always silent, solitary, still
delighting in husbandry, in woods, orchards, gardens, rivers,
ponds, pools, dark walks and close: Cogitationes sunt velle
aedificare, velle arbores plantare, agros colere, &c. To
catch birds, fishes, &c., still contriving and musing of such
matters. If Jupiter domineers, they are more ambitious, still
meditating of kingdoms, magistracies, offices, honours, or
that they are princes, potentates, and how they would carry
themselves, &c. If Mars, they are all for wars, brave
combats, monomachies, testy, choleric, harebrain, rash,
furious, and violent in their actions. They will feign
themselves victors, commanders, are passionate and satirical
in their speeches, great braggers, ruddy of colour. And
though they be poor in show, vile and base, yet like Telephus
and Peleus in the poet, Ampullas jactant et sesquipedalia
verba, "forget their swelling and gigantic words," their
mouths are full of myriads, and tetrarchs at their tongues'
end. If the sun, they will be lords, emperors, in conceit at
least, and monarchs, give offices, honours, &c. If Venus,
they are still courting of their mistresses, and most apt to
love, amorously given, they seem to hear music, plays, see
fine pictures, dancers, merriments, and the like. Ever in
love, and dote on all they see. Mercurialists are solitary,
much in contemplation, subtile, poets, philosophers, and
musing most part about such matters. If the moon have a hand,
they are all for peregrinations, sea voyages, much affected
with travels, to discourse, read, meditate of such things;
wandering in their thoughts, diverse, much delighting in
waters, to fish, fowl, &c. But the most immediate symptoms
proceed from the temperature itself; and the organical parts,
as head, liver, spleen, meseraic veins, heart, womb, stomach,
&c., and most especially from distemperature of spirits
(which, as Hercules de Saxonia contends, are wholly
immaterial), or from the four humours in those seats, whether
they be hot or cold, natural, unnatural, innate or
adventitious, intended or remitted, simple or mixed, their
diverse mixtures, and several adustions, combinations, which
may be as diversely varied, as those four first qualities in
Clavius, and produce as many several symptoms and monstrous
fictions as wine doth effect, which as Andreas Bachius
observes, lib. 3. de vino, cap. 20. are infinite. Of greater
note be these.

If it be natural melancholy, as Lod. Mercatus, lib. 1. cap.
17. de melan. T. Bright, c. 16. hath largely described,
either of the spleen, or of the veins, faulty by excess of
quantity, or thickness of substance, it is a cold and dry
humour, as Montanus affirms, consil. 26. the parties are sad,
timorous and fearful. Prosper Calenus, in his book de atra
bile, will have them to be more stupid than ordinary, cold,
heavy, dull, solitary, sluggish; Si multam atram bilem et
frigidam habent. Hercules de Saxonia, c. 19. l. 7. "holds
these that are naturally melancholy, to be of a leaden colour
or black," and so doth Guianerius, c. 3. tract. 15. and such
as think themselves dead many times, or that they see, talk
with black men, dead men, spirits and goblins frequently, if
it be in excess. These symptoms vary according to the mixture
of those four humours adust, which is unnatural melancholy.
For as Trallianus hath written, cap. 16, l. 7. "Thre is not
one cause of this melancholy, nor one humour which begets,
but diverse diversely intermixed, from whence proceeds this
variety of symptoms:" and those varying again as they are hot
or cold. "Cold melancholy (saith Benedic. Vittorius
Faventinus pract. mag.) is a cause of dotage, and more mild
symptoms; if hot or more adust, of more violent passions, and
furies." Fracastorius, l. 2. de intellect, will have us to
consider well of it, "with what kind of melancholy every one
is troubled, for it much avails to know it; one is enraged by
fervent heat, another is possessed by sad and cold; one is
fearful, shamefaced; the other impudent and bold; as Ajax,
Arma rapit superosque furens in proelia poscit: quite mad or
tending to madness: Nunc hos, nunc impetit illos. Bellerophon
on the other side, solis errat male sanus in agris, wanders
alone in the woods; one despairs, weeps, and is weary of his
life, another laughs, &c. All which variety is produced from
the several degrees of heat and cold, which Hercules de
Saxonia will have wholly proceed from the distemperature of
spirits alone, animal especially, and those immaterial, the
next and immediate causes of melancholy, as they are hot,
cold, dry, moist, and from their agitation proceeds that
diversity of symptoms, which he reckons up in the thirteenth
chap. of his Tract of Melancholy, and that largely through
every part. Others will have them come from the diverse
adustion of the four humours, which in this unnatural
melancholy, by corruption of blood, adust choler, or
melancholy natural, "by excessive distemper of heat turned,
in comparison of the natural, into a sharp lye by force of
adustion, cause, according to the diversity of their matter,
diverse and strange symptoms," which T. Bright reckons up in
his following chapter. So doth Arculanus, according to the
four principal humours adust, and many others.

For example, if it proceed from phlegm (which is seldom and
not so frequently as the rest), it stirs up dull symptoms,
and a kind of stupidity, or impassionate hurt: they are
sleepy, saith Savanarola, dull, slow, cold, blockish, ass-
like, Asininam melancholicam, Melancthon calls it, "they are
much given to weeping and delight in waters, ponds, pools,
rivers, fishing, fowling," &c. (Arnoldus, breviar. 1. cap.
18.) They are pale of colour, slothful, apt to sleep, heavy;
much troubled with head-ache, continual meditation, and
muttering to themselves; they dream of waters, that they are
in danger of drowning, and fear such things, Rhasis. They are
fatter than others that are melancholy, of a muddy
complexion, apter to spit, sleep, more troubled with rheum
than the rest, and have their eyes still fixed on the ground.
Such a patient had Hercules de Saxonia, a widow in Venice,
that was fat and very sleepy still; Christophorus a Vega
another affected in the same sort. If it be inveterate or
violent, the symptoms are more evident, they plainly denote
and are ridiculous to others, in all their gestures, actions,
speeches; imagining impossibilities, as he in Christophorus a
Vega, that thought he was a tun of wine, and that Siennois,
that resolved within himself not to piss, for fear he should
drown all the town.

If it proceed from blood adust, or that there be a mixture of
blood in it, "such as are commonly ruddy of complexion, and
high-coloured," according to Salust Salvianus, and Hercules
de Saxonia. And as Savanarola, Vittorius Faventinus Emper.
farther adds, "the veins of their eyes be red, as well as
their faces." They are much inclined to laughter, witty and
merry, conceited in discourse, pleasant, if they be not far
gone, much given to music, dancing, and to be in women's
company. They meditate wholly on such things, and think they
see or hear plays, dancing, and such-like sports (free from
all fear and sorrow, as Hercules de Saxonia supposeth). If
they be more strongly possessed with this kind of melancholy,
Arnoldus adds, Breviar., lib. 1. cap. 18., like him of Argos
in the Poet, that sate laughing all day long, as if he had
been at a theatre. Such another is mentioned by Aristotle,
living at Abydos, a town of Asia Minor, that would sit after
the same fashion, as if he had been upon a stage, and
sometimes act himself; now clap his hands, suck laugh, as if
he had been well pleased with the sight. Woltius relates of a
country fellow called Brunsellius, subject to this humour,
"that being by chance at a sermon, saw a woman fall off from
a form half asleep, at which object most of the company
laughed, but he for his part was so much moved, that for
three whole days after he did nothing but laugh, by which
means he was much weakened, and worse a long time following."
Such a one was old Sophocles, and Democritus himself had
hilare delirium, much in this vein. Laurentius, cap. 3. de
melan. thinks this kind of melancholy, which is a little
adust with some mixture of blood, to be that which Aristotle
meant, when he said melancholy men of all others are most
witty, which causeth many times a divine ravishment, and a
kind of enthusiasmus, which stirreth them up to be excellent
philosophers, poets, prophets, &c. Mercurialis consil. 110.
gives instance in a young man his patient, sanguine
melancholy, "of a great wit, and excellently learned."

If it arise from choler adust, they are bold and impudent,
and of a more harebrain disposition, apt to quarrel, and
think of such things, battles, combats, and their manhood,
furious; impatient in discourse, stiff, irrefragable and
prodigious in their tenets; and if they be moved, most
violent, outrageous, ready to disgrace, provoke any, to kill
themselves and others; Arnoldus adds, stark mad by fits,
"they sleep little, their urine is subtile and fiery.
(Guianerius.) In their fits you shall hear them speak all
manner of languages, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, that never
were taught or knew them before." Apponensis in com. in Pro.
sec. 30. speaks of a mad woman that spake excellent good 
Latin: and Rhasis knew another, that could prophesy in her
fit, and foretel things truly to come. Guianerius had a
patient could make Latin verses when the moon was combust,
otherwise illiterate. Avicenna and some of his adherents will
have these symptoms, when they happen, to proceed from the
devil, and that they are rather daemoniaci, possessed, than
mad or melancholy, or both together, as Jason Pratensis
thinks, Immiscent se mali genii, &c., but most ascribe it to
the humour, which opinion Montaltus, cap. 21. stiffly
maintains, confuting Avicenna and the rest, referring it
wholly to the quality and disposition of the humour and
subject. Cardan de rerum var. lib. 8. cap. 10. holds these
men of all others fit to be assassins, bold, hardy, fierce,
and adventurous, to undertake any thing by reason of their
choler adust. "This humour, says he, prepares them to endure
death itself and all manner of torments with invincible
courage, and 'tis a wonder to see with what alacrity they
will undergo such tortures," ut supra naturam res videatur:
he ascribes this generosity, fury, or rather stupidity, to
this adustion of choler and melancholy: but I take these
rather to be mad or desperate, than properly melancholy: for
commonly this humour so adust and hot, degenerates into
madness.

If it come from melancholy itself adust, those men, saith
Avicenna, "are usually sad and solitary, and that
continually, and in excess, more than ordinarily suspicious,
more fearful, and have long, sore, and most corrupt
imaginations;" cold and black, bashful, and so solitary, that
as Arnoldus writes, "they will endure no company, they dream
of graves still, and dead men, and think themselves bewitched
or dead:" if it be extreme, they think they hear hideous
noises, see and talk "with black men, and converse familiarly
with devils, and such strange chimeras and visions"
(Gordonius), or that they are possessed by them, that
somebody talks to them, or within them. Tales melancholici
plerumque daemoniaci, Montaltus, consil. 26. ex Avicennna.
Valescus de Taranta had such a woman in cure, "that thought
she had to do with the devil:" and Gentilis Fulgosus quaest
55. writes that he had a melancholy friend, that "had a black 
man in the likeness of a soldier" still following him
wheresoever he was. Laurentius, cap. 7., hath many stories of
such as have thought themselves bewitched by their enemies;
and some that would eat no meat as being dead. Anno 1550 an
advocate of Paris fell into such a melancholy fit, that he
believed verily he was dead, he could not be persuaded
otherwise, or to eat or drink, till a kinsman of his, a
scholar of Bourges, did eat before him dressed like a corse.
The story, saith Serres, was acted in a comedy before Charles
the Ninth. Some think they are beasts, wolves, hogs, and cry
like dogs, foxes, bray like asses, and low like kine, as King
Praetus' daughters. Hildesheim, spicel. 2. de mania, hath an
example of a Dutch baron so affected, and Trincavellius, lib.
1. consil. 11., another of a nobleman in his country, "that
thought he was certainly a beast, and would imitate most of
their voices," with many such symptoms, which may properly be
reduced to this kind.

If it proceed from the several combinations of these four
humours, or spirits, Herc. de Saxon. adds hot, cold, dry,
moist, dark, confused, settled, constringed, as it
participates of matter, or is without matter, the symptoms
are likewise mixed. One thinks himself a giant, another a
dwarf; one is heavy as lead, another is as light as a
feather. Marcellus Donatus, l. 2. cap. 41. makes mention out
of Seneca, of one Senecchio, a rich man, "that thought
himself and every thing else he had, great: great wife, great
horses, could not abide little things, but would have great
pots to drink in, great hose, and great shoes bigger than his
feet." Like her in Trallianus, that supposed she "could shake
all the world with her finger," and was afraid to clinch her
hand together, lest she should crush the world like an apple
in pieces: or him in Galen, that thought he was Atlas, and
sustained heaven with his shoulders. Another thinks himself
so little, that he can creep into a mouse-hole: one fears
heaven will fall on his head: a second is a cock; and such a
one, Guianerius saith he saw at Padua, that would clap his
hands together and crow. Another thinks he is a nightingale,
and therefore sings all the night long; another he is all
glass, a pitcher, and will therefore let nobody come near
him, and such a one Laurentius gives out upon his credit,
that he knew in France. Christophorus a Vega, cap. 3., l.
14., Skenckius and Marcellus Donatus, l. 2. cap. 1. have many
such examples, and one amongst the rest of a baker in
Ferrara, that thought he was composed of butter, and durst
not sit in the sun, or come near the fire for fear of being
melted: of another that thought he was a case of leather,
stuffed with wind. Some laugh, weep; some are mad, some
dejected, moped, in much agony, some by fits, others
continuate, &c. Some have a corrupt ear, they think they hear
music, or some hideous noise as their phantasy conceives,
corrupt eyes, some smelling: some one sense, some another.
Lewis the Eleventh had a conceit every thing did stink about
him, all the odoriferous perfumes they could get, would not
ease him, but still he smelled a filthy stink. A melancholy
French poet in Laurentius being sick of a fever, and troubled
with waking, by his physicians was appointed to use ungentum
populeum to anoint his temples; but he so distasted the smell
of it, that for many years after, all that came near him he
imagined to scent of it, and would let no man talk with him
but aloof off, or wear any new clothes, because he thought
still they smelled of it; in all other things wise and
discreet, he would talk sensibly, save only in this. A
gentleman in Limousin, saith Anthony Verdeur, was persuaded
he had but one leg, affrighted by a wild boar, that by chance
struck him on the leg; he could not be satisfied his leg was
sound (in all other things well) until two Franciscans by
chance coming that way, fully removed him from the conceit.
Sed abunde fabularum audivimus,-- enough of story-telling.



SUBSECT. IV.-- Symptoms from Education, Custom, Continuance
of Time, our Condition, mixed with other Diseases, by Fits,
Inclination, &c.


ANTHER great occasion of the variety of these symptoms
proceeds from custom, discipline, education, and several
inclinations, "this humour will imprint in melancholy men the
objects most answerable to their condition of life, and
ordinary actions, and dispose men according to their several
studies and callings." If an ambitious man become melancholy,
he forthwith thinks he is a king, an emperor, a monarch, and
walks alone, pleasing himself with a vain hope of some future
preferment, or present as he supposeth, and withal acts a
lord's part, takes upon him to be some statesman or
magnifico, makes congés, gives entertainment, looks big, &c.
Francisco Sansovino records of a melancholy man in Cremona,
that would not be induced to believe but that he was pope,
gave pardons, made cardinals, &c. Christophorus a Vega makes
mention of another of his acquaintance, that thought he was a
king, driven from his kingdom, and was very anxious to
recover his estate. A covetous person is still conversant
about purchasing of lands and tenements, plotting in his mind
how to compass such and such manors, as if he were already
lord of, and able to go through with it; all he sees is his,
re or spe, he hath devoured it in hope, or else in conceit
esteems it his own: like him in Athenaeus, that thought all
the ships in the haven to be his own. A lascivious inamorato
plots all the day long to please his mistress, acts and
struts, and carries himself as if she were in presence, still
dreaming of her, as Pamphilus of his Glycerium, or as some do
in their morning sleep. Marcellus Donatus knew such a
gentlewoman in Mantua, called Elionora Meliorina, that
constantly believed she was married to a king, and "would
kneel down and talk with him, as if he had been there present
with his associates; and if she had found by chance a piece
of glass in a muck-hill or in the street, she would say that
it was a jewel sent from her lord and husband." If devout and
religious, he is all for fasting, prayer, ceremonies, alms,
interpretations, visions, prophecies, revelations, he is
inspired by the Holy Ghost, full of the Spirit: one while he
is saved, another while damned, or still troubled in mind for
his sins, the devil will surely have him, &c. More of these
in the third partition of love-melancholy. A scholar's mind
is busied about his studies, he applauds himself for what he
hath done, or hopes to do, one while fearing to be out in his
next exercise, another while contemning all censures; envies
one, emulates another; or else with indefatigable pains and
meditation, consumes himself. So of the rest, all which vary
according to the more remiss and violent impression of the
object, or as the humour itself is intended or remitted. For
some are so gently melancholy, that in all their carriage,
and to the outward apprehension of others it can hardly be
discerned, yet to them an intolerable burden, and not to be
endured. Quaedam occulta quaedam manifesta, some signs are
manifest and obvious to all at all times, some to few or
seldom, or hardly perceived; let them keep their own counsel,
none will take notice or suspect them. They do not express in
outward show their depraved imaginations," as Hercules de
Saxonia observes, "but conceal them wholly to themselves, and
are very wise men, as I have often seen; some fear, some do
not fear at all, as such as think themselves kings or dead,
some have more signs, some fewer, some great, some less, some
vex, fret, still fear, grieve, lament, suspect, laugh, sing,
weep, chafe, &c. by fits (as I have said) or more during and
permanent." Some dote in one thing, are most childish, and
ridiculous, and to be wondered at in that, and yet for all
other matters most discreet and wise. To some it is in
disposition, to another in habit; and as they write of heat
and cold, we may say of this humour, one is melancholicus ad
octo, a second two degrees less, a third half-way. 'Tis
superparticular, sesquialtera, sesquitertia, and
superbipartiens tertias, quintas Melancholiae, &c., all those
geometrical proportions are too little to express it. "It
comes to many by fits, and goes; to others it is continuate:
many (saith Faventinus) in spring and fall only are molested,
some once a year, as that Roman Galen speaks of: one, at the
conjunction of the moon alone, or some unfortunate aspects,
at such and such set hours and times, like the sea-tides, to
some women when they be with child, as Plater notes, never
otherwise: to others 'tis settled and fixed: to one led about
and variable still by that ignis fatuus of phantasy, like an
arthritis or running gout, 'tis here and there, and in every
joint, always molesting some part or other; or if the body be
free, in a myriad of forms exercising the mind. A second once
peradventure in his life hath a most grievous fit, once in
seven years, once in five years, even to the extremity of
madness, death, or dotage, and that upon some feral accident
or perturbation, terrible object, and that for a time, never
perhaps so before, never after. A third is moved upon all
such troublesome objects, cross fortune, disaster, and
violent passions, otherwise free, once troubled in three or
four years. A fourth, if things be to his mind, or he in
action, well pleased, in good company, is most jocund, and of
a good complexion: if idle, or alone, à la mort, or carried
away wholly with pleasant dreams and phantasies, but if once
crossed and displeased,

"Pectore concipiet nil nisi triste suo;"
"He will imagine naught save sadness in his heart;"

his countenance is altered on a sudden, his heart heavy,
irksome thoughts crucify his soul, and in an instant he is
moped or weary of his life, he will kill himself. A fifth
complains in his youth, a sixth in his middle age, the last
in his old age.

Generally thus much we may conclude of melancholy; that it is
most pleasant at first, I say, mentis gratissimus error, (a
most agreeable mental delusion) a most delightsome humour, to
be alone, dwell alone, walk alone, meditate, lie in bed whole
days, dreaming awake as it were, and frame a thousand
fantastical imaginations unto themselves. They are never
better pleased then when they are so doing, they are in
paradise for the time, and cannot well endure to be
interrupt; with him in the poet, pol me occidistis, amici,
non servastis, ait? you have undone him, he complains if you
trouble him: tell him what inconvenience will follow, what
will be the event, all is one, canis ad vomitum, 'tis so
pleasant he cannot refrain. He may thus continue peradventure
many years by reason of a strong temperature, or some mixture
of business, which may divert his cogitations: but at the
last laesa imaginatio, his phantasy is crazed, and now
habituated to such toys, cannot but work still like a fate,
the scene alters upon a sudden, fear and sorrow supplant
those pleasing thoughts, suspicion, discontent, and perpetual
anxiety succeed in their places; so by little and little, by
that shoeing-horn of idleness, and voluntary solitariness,
melancholy this feral fiend is drawn on, et quantum vertice
ad auras Aethereas, tantum radice in Tartara tendit,
"extending up, by its branches, so far towards Heaven, as, by
its roots it does down towards Tartarus;" it was not so
delicious at first, as now it is bitter and harsh; a cankered
soul macerated with cares and discuntents, taedium vitae,
impatience, agony, inconstancy, irresolution, precipitate
them unto unspeakable miseries. They cannot endure company, 
light, or life itself, some unfit for action, and the like.
Their bodies are lean and dried up, withered, ugly, their
looks harsh, very dull, and their souls tormented, as they
are more or less entangled, as the humour hath been intended,
or according to the continuance of time they have been
troubled.

To discern all which symptoms the better, Rhasis the Arabian
makes three degrees of them. The first is, falsa cogitatio,
false conceits and idle thoughts: to misconstrue and amplify,
aggravating every thing they conceive or fear; the second is,
falso cogitata loqui, to talk to themselves, or to use
inarticulate incondite voices, speeches, obsolete gestures,
and plainly to utter their minds and conceits of their
hearts, by their words and actions, as to laugh, weep, to be
silent, not to sleep, eat their meat, &c.: the third is to
put in practice that which they think or speak. Savanarola,
Rub. 11. Tract. 8. cap. 1. de aegritudine, confirms as much,
"when he begins to express that in words, which he conceives
in his heart, or talks idly, or goes from one thing to
another," which Gordonius calls nec caput habentia nec caudam
("having neither head nor tail"), he is in the middle way:
"but when he begins to act it likewise, and to put his
fopperies in execution, be is then in the extent of
melancholy, or madness itself." This progress of melancholy
you shall easily observe in them that have been so affected,
they go smiling to themselves at first, at length they laugh
out; at first solitary, at last they can endure no company:
or if they do, they are now dizzards, past sense and shame,
quite moped, they care not what they say or do, all their
actions, words, gestures, are furious or ridiculous. At first
his mind is troubled, he doth not attend what is said, if you
tell him a tale, he cries at last, what said you? but in the
end he mutters to himself; as old women do many times, or old
men when they sit alone, upon a sudden they laugh, whoop,
halloo, or run away, and swear they see or hear players,
devils, hobgoblins, ghosts, strike, or strut, &c., grow
humorous in the end: like him in the poet, saepe ducentos,
saepe decem servos ("at one time followed by two hundred
servants, at another only by ten"), he will dress himself;
and undress, careless at last, grows insensible, stupid, or
mad. He howls like a wolf; barks like a dog, and raves like
Ajax and Orestes, hears music and outcries, which no man else
hears. As he did whom Amatus Lusitanus mentioneth cent. 3,
cura. 55, or that woman in Springer, that spake many
languages, and said she was possessed: that farmer in Prosper
Calenus, that disputed and discoursed learnedly in philosophy
and astromomy with Alexander Achilles his master, at Bologna,
in Italy. But of these I have already spoken.

Who can sufficiently speak of these symptoms, or prescribe
rules to comprehend them? as Echo to the painter in Ausonius,
vane, quid afectas, &c., foolish fellow; what wilt? if you
must needs paint me, paint a voice, et similem si vis
pingere, pinge sonum; if you will describe melancholy,
describe a phantastical conceit, a corrupt imagination, vain
thoughts and different, which who can do? The four and twenty
letters make no more variety of words in diverse languages,
than melancholy conceits produce diversity of symptoms in
several persons. They are irregular, obscure, various, so
infinite, Proteus himself is not so diverse, you may as well
make the moon a new coat, as a true character of a melancholy
man; as soon find the motion of a bird in the air, as the
heart of man, a melancholy man. They are so confused, I say,
diverse, intermixed with other diseases. As the species be
confounded (which I have shewed) so are the symptoms:
sometimes with headache, cachexia, dropsy, stone; as you may
perceive by those several examples and illustrations,
collected by Hildesheim, spicel. 2, Mercurialis, consil. 118.
cap. 6 and 11, with headache, epilepsy, priapismus.
Trincavellius, consil. 12. lib. 1. consil. 49. with gout:
caninus appetitus. Montanus, consil. 26, &c. 23, 234, 249,
with falling-sickness, headache, vertigo, lycanthropia, &c.
I. Caesar Claudinus, consult. 4. consult. 89 and 116, with
gout, agues, haemorrhoids, stone, &c., who can distinguish
these melancholy symptoms so intermixed with others, or apply
them to their several kinds, confine them into method? 'Tis
hard I confess, yet I have disposed of them as I could, and
will descend to particularise them according to their
species. For hitherto I have expatiated in more general lists
or terms, speaking promiscuously of such ordinary signs,
which occur amongst writers. Not that they are all to be
found in one man, for that were to paint a monster or
chimera, not a man: but some in one, some in another, and
that successively, or at several times.

Which I have been the more curious to express and report; not
to upbraid any miserable man, or by way of derision (I rather
pity them), but the better to discern, to apply remedies unto
them; and to show that the best and soundest of us all is in
great danger; how much we ought to fear our own fickle
estates, remember our miseries and vanities, examine and
humiliate ourselves, seek to God, and call to Him for mercy,
that needs not look for any rods to scourge ourselves, since
we carry  them in our bowels, and that our souls are in a
miserable captivity, if the light of grace and heavenly truth
doth not shine continually upon us: and by our discretion to
moderate ourselves, to be more circumspect and wary in the
midst of these dangers.



MEMB. II.

SUBSECT. I.-- Symptoms of Head-Melancholy.

"IF no symptoms appear about the stomach, nor the blood be
misaffected, and fear and sorrow continue, it is to be
thought the brain itself is troubled, by reason of a
melancholy juice bred in it, or otherwise conveyed into it,
and that evil juice is from the distemperature of the part,
or left after some inftammation," thus far Piso. But this is
not always true,for blood and hypochondries both are often
affected even in head-melancholy. Hercules de Saxonia differs
here from the common current of writers, putting peculiar
signs of head-melancholy, from the sole distemperature of
spirits in the brain, as they are hot, cold, dry, moist, "all
without matter from the motion alone, and tenebrosity of
spirits;" of melancholy which proceeds from humours by
adustion, he treats apart, with their several symptoms and
cures. The common signs, if it be by essence in the head,
"are ruddiness of face,  high sanguine complexion, most part
rubore saturato, one calls it a blush, and sometimes full of
pimples," with red eyes. Aviceona, l. 3, Fen. 2, Tract. 4, c.
18. Duretus and others outof Galen, de affect. l. 3, c. 6.
Hercules de Saxonia to this of redness of face, adds
"heaviness of the head, fixed and hollow eyes. If it proceed
from dryness of the brain, then their heads will be light,
vertiginous, and they most apt to wake, and to continue whole
months together without sleep. Few excrements in their eyes
and nostrils, and often bald by reason of excess of dryness,"
Montaltus adds, c. 17. If it proceed from moisture: dulness,
drowsiness, headache follows; and as Salust. Salvianus, c. 1,
l. 2, out of his own experience found, epileptical, with a
multitude of humours in the head. They are very bashful, if
ruddy, apt to blush, and to be red upon all occasions,
praesertim si metus accesserit. But the chiefest symptom to
discern this species, as I have said, is this, that there be
no notable signs in the stomach, hypochondries, or elsewhere,
digna, as Montaltus terms them, or of greater note, because
oftentimes the passions of the stomach concur with them. Wind
is common to all three species, and is not excluded, only
that of the hypochondries is more windy than the rest, saith
Hollerius. Aetius, tetrab. l. 2, sc. 2, c. 9, and 10,
maintains the same, if there be more signs, and more evident
in the head than elsewhere, the brain is primarily affected
and prescribes head-melancholy to be cured by meats amongst
the rest, void of wind, and good juice, not excluding wind,
or corrupt blood, even in head-melancholy itself: but these
species are often confounded, and so are their symptoms, as I
have already proved. The symptoms of the mind are superfluous
and continual cogitations: "for when the head is heated, it
scorcheth the blood, and from thence proceed melancholy 
fumes, which trouble the mind," Avicenna. They are very
choleric, and soon hot, solitary, sad, often silent,
watchful, discontent, Montaltus, cap. 24. If any thing
trouble them, they cannot sleep, but fret themselves still,
till another object mitigate, or time wear it out. They have
grievous passions, and immoderate perturbations of the mind,
fear, sorrow, &c., yet not so continuate, but that they are
sometimes merry, apt to profuse laughter, which is more to be
wondered at, and that by the authority of Galen himself, by
reason of mixture of blood, praerubri jocosis delectantur et
irrisores plerumque sunt, if they be ruddy, they are
delighted in jests, and sometimes scoffers themselves,
conceited: and as Rodericus a Vega comments on that place of
Galen, merry, witty, of a pleasant disposition, and yet
grievously melancholy anon after: omnia discunt sine doctore,
saith Areteus, they learn without a teacher: and as
Laurentius supposeth, those feral passions and symptoms of
such as think themselves glass, pitchers, feathers, &c.,
speak strange languages, proceed a calore cerebri (if it be
in excess), from the brain's distempered heat.



SUBSECT. II.-- Symptoms of windy Hypochondriacal Melancholy.


"IN this hypochondriacal or fatuous melancholy, the Symptoms
are so ambiguous," saith Crato in a counsel of his for a
noblewoman, "that the most exquisite physicians cannot
determine of the part affected." Matthew Flaccius, consulted
about a noble matron, confessed as much, that in this malady
he with Hollerius, Fracastorius, Fallopius, and others, being
to give their sentence of a party labouring of
hypochondriacal melancholy, could not find out by the
symptoms which part was most especially affected; some said
the womb, some heart, some stomach, &c., and therefore Crato,
consil. 24. lib. 1. boldly avers, that in this diversity of
symptoms, which commonly accompany this disease, "no
physician can truly say what part is affected." Galen, lib.
3. de loc. affect. reckons up these ordinary symptoms, which
all the Neoterics repeat of Diodes; only this fault he finds
with him, that he puts not fear and sorrow amongst the other
signs. Trincavellius excuseth Diocles, lib. 3. consil. 35.
because that oftentimes in a strong head and constitution, a
generous spirit, and a valiant, these symptoms appear not, by
reason of his valour and courage.  Hercules de Saxonia (to
whom I subscribe) is of the same mind (which I have before
touched) that fear and sorrow are not general symptoms; some
fear and are not sad; some be sad and fear not; some neither
fear nor grieve. The rest are these, beside fear and sorrow,
"sharp belchings, fulsome crudities, heat in the bowels, wind
and rumbling in the guts, vehement gripings, pain in the
belly and stomach sometimes, after meat that is hard of
concoction, much watering of the stomach, and moist spittle,
cold sweat, importunus sudor, unseasonable sweat all over the
body," as Octavius Horatianus, lib. 2. cap. 5. calls it; cold
joints, indigestion, "they cannot endure their own fulsome
belchings, continual wind about their hypochondries, heat and
griping in their bowels, praecordia sursum convelluntur;
midriff and bowels are pulled up, the veins about their eyes
look red, and swell from vapours and wind." Their ears sing
now and then, vertigo and giddiness come by fits, turbulent
dreams, dryness, leanness, apt they are to sweat upon all
occasions, of all colours and complexions. Many of them are
high-coloured, especially after meals, which symptom Cardinal
Caecius was much troubled with, and of which he complained to
Prosper Calenus his physician, he could not eat, or drink a
cup of wine, but he was as red in the face as if he had been
at a mayor's feast. That symptom alone vexeth many. Some
again are black, pale, ruddy, sometimes their shoulders, and
shoulder blades ache, there is a leaping all over their
bodies, sudden trembling, a palpitation of the heart, and
that cardiaca passio, grief in the mouth of the stomach,
which maketh the patient think his heart itself acheth, and
sometimes suffocation, difficultas anhelitus, short breath,
hard wind, strong pulse, swooning. Montanus, consil. 55,
Trincavellius, lib. 3. consil. 36, et 37. Fernelius, cons.
43. Frambesarius, consult. lib. 1. consil. 17. Hildesheim,
Claudinus, &c., give instance of every particular. The
peculiar symptoms, which properly belong to each part be
these. If it proceed from the stomach saith Savanarola, 'tis
full of pain and wind, Guianerius adds vertigo, nausea, much
spitting, &c. if from the myrach, a swelling and wind in the
hypochondries, a loathing, and appetite to vomit, pulling
upward. If from the heart, aching and trembling of it, much
heaviness. If from the liver, there is usually a pain in the
right hypochondrie. If from the spleen, hardness and grief in
the left hypochondrie, a rumbling, much appetite and small
digestion, Avicenna. If from the meseraic veins and liver on
the other side, little or no appetite, Herc. de Saxonia. If
from the hypochondries, a rumbling inflation, concoction is
hindered, often belching, &c. And from these crudities, windy
vapours ascend up to the brain which trouble the imagination,
and cause fear, sorrow, dulness, heaviness, many terrible
conceits and chimeras, as Lemnius well observes, l. 1. c. 16.
"as a black and thick cloud covers the sun, and intercepts
his beams and light, so doth this melancholy vapour
obnubilate the mind, enforce it to many absurd thoughts and
imaginations," and compel, good, wise, honest, discreet men
(arising to the brain from the lower part; "as smoke out of a
chimney") to dote, speak, and do that which becomes them not,
their persons, callings, wisdoms. One by reason of those
ascending vapours and gripings, rumbling beneath, will not be
persuaded but that he hath a serpent in his guts, a viper,
another frogs. Trallianus relates a story of a woman, that
imagined she had swallowed an eel, or a serpent, and Felix
Platerus, observat. lib. 1. hath a most memorable example of
a countryman of his, that by chance falling into a pit where
frogs and frogs' spawn was, and a little of that water
swallowed, began to suspect that he had likewise swallowed
frogs' spawn, and with that conceit and fear, his phantasy
wrought so far, that he verily thought he had young live
frogs in his belly, qui vivebant ex alimento suo, that lived
by his nourishment, and was so certainly persuaded of it,
that for many years following he could not be rectified in
his conceit: He studied physic seven years together to cure
himself, travelled into Italy, France and Germany to confer
with the best physicians about it, and Anno 1609, asked his 
counsel amongst the rest; he told him it was wind, his
conceit, &c., but mordicus contradicere, et ore et scriptis
probare nitebatur: no saying would serve, it was no wind, but
real frogs: "and do you not hear them croak?" Platerus would
have deceived him, by putting live frogs into his excrements;
but he, being a physician himself would not be deceived, vir
prudens alias, et doctus, a wise and learned man otherwise, a
doctor of physic, and after seven years' dotage in this kind,
a phantasia liberatus est, he was cured. Laurentius and
Goulart have many such examples, if you be desirous to read
them. One commodity above the rest which are melancholy,
these windy flatuous have, lucida intervalla, their symptoms
and pains are not usually so continuate as the rest, but come
by fits, fear and sorrow, and the rest: yet in another they
exceed all others; and that is, they are luxurious,
incontinent, and prone to venery, by reason of wind, et
facile amant, et quam libet fere amant. (Jason Pratensis.)
Rhasis is of opinion, that Venus doth many of them much good;
the other symptoms of the mind be common with the rest.



SUBSECT. III.-- Symptoms of Melancholy abounding in the whole
body.


THEIR bodies that are affected with this universal melancholy
are most part black, "the melancholy juice is redundant all
over," hirsute they are, and lean, they have broad veins,
their blood is gross and thick. "Their spleen is weak," and a
liver apt to engender the humour; they have kept bad diet, or
have had some evacuation stopped, as haemorrhoids, or months
in women, which Trallianus, in the cure, would have carefully
to be inquired, and withal to observe of what complexion the
party is of; black or red. For as Forrestus and Hollerius
contend, if they be black, it proceeds from abundance of
natural melancholy; if it proceed from cares, agony,
discontents, diet, exercise, &c., these may be as well of any
other colour: red, yellow, pale, as black, and yet their
whole blood corrupt: praerubri colore saepe sunt tales, saepe
flavi, (saith Montaltus, cap. 22) The best way to discern
this species, is to let them bleed, if the blood be corrupt,
thick and black, and they withal free from those
hypochondriacal symptoms, and not so grievously troubled with
them, or those of the head, it argues they are melancholy, a
toto corpore. The fumes which arise from this corrupt blood,
disturb the mind, and make them fearful and sorrowful, heavy
hearted as the rest, dejected, discontented, solitary,
silent, weary of their lives, dull and heavy, or merry, &c.,
and if far gone, that which Apuleius wished to his enemy, by
way of imprecation, is true in them; "Dead men's bones,
hobgoblins, ghosts, are ever in their minds, and meet them
still in every turn: all the bugbears of the night, and
terrors, fairy-babes of tombs, and graves are before their
eyes, and in their thoughts, as to women and children, if
they be in the dark alone." If they hear, or read, or see any
tragical object, it sticks by them, they are afraid of death,
and yet weary of their lives, in their discontented humours
they quarrel with all the world, bitterly inveigh, tax
satirically, and because they cannot otherwise vent their
passions or redress what is amiss, as they mean, they will by
violent death at last be revenged on themselves.



SUBSECT. IV.-- Symptoms of Maids, Nuns, and Widows'
Melancholy.


BECAUSE Lodovicus Mercatus in his second book de mulier.
affect. cap. 4. and Rodericus a Castro de morb. mulier. cap.
3. lib. 4. two famous physicians in Spain, Daniel Sennertus
of Wittenberg, lib. 1. part. 2. cap. 13. with others; have
vouchsafed in their works, not long since published, to write
two just treatises de Melancholia Virginum, Monialium et
Viduarum, as a particular species of melancholy (which I have
already specified) distinct from the rest; (for it much
differs from that which commonly befalls men and other women,
as having one only cause proper to women alone) I may not
omit in this general survey of melancholy symptoms, to set
down the particular signs of such parties so misaffected.

The causes are assigned out of Hippocrates, Cleopatra,
Moschion, and those old Gynaeciorum Scriptores, of this feral
malady, in more ancient maids, widows, and barren women, ob
septum transversum violatum, saith Mercatus, by reason of the
midriff or Diaphragma, heart and brain offended with those
vicious vapours which come from menstruous blood,
inflammationem arterias circa dorsum, Rodericus adds, an
inflammation of the back, which with the rest is offended by
that fuliginous exhalation of corrupt seed, troubling the
brain, heart and mind; the brain, I say, not in essence, but
by consent, Universa enim hujus affectus causa ab utero
pendet, et a sanguinis menstrui malitia, for in a word, the
whole malady proceeds from that inflammation, putridity,
black smoky vapours, &c., from thence comes care, sorrow, and
anxiety, obfuscation of spirits, agony, desperation, and the
like, which are intended or remitted; si amatorius accesserit
ardor, or any other violent object or perturbation of mind.
This melancholy  may happen to widows, with much care and
sorrow, as frequently it doth, by reason of a sudden
alteration of their accustomed course of life, &c. To such as
be in childbed ob suppressam purgationem; but to nuns and
more ancient maids, and some barren women for the causes
aforesaid, 'tis more familiar, crebrius his quam reliquis
accidit, inquit Rodericus, the rest are not altogether
excluded.

Out of these causes Rodericus defines it with Areteus, to be
angorem animi, a vexation of the mind, a sudden sorrow from a
small, light, or no occasion, with a kind of still dotage and
grief of some part or other, head, heart, breasts, sides,
back, belly, &c., with much solitariness, weeping,
distraction, &c., from which they are sometimes suddenly
delivered, because it comes and goes by fits, and is not so
permanent as other melancholy.

But to leave this brief description, the most ordinary
symptoms be these, pulsatio juxta dorsum, a beating about the
back, which is almost perpetual, the skin is many times
rough, squalid, especially, as Areteus observes, about the
arms, knees, and knuckles. The midriff and heart-strings do
burn and beat very fearfully, and when this vapour or fume is
stirred, flieth upward, the heart itself beats, is sore
grieved, and faints, fauces siccitate praecluduntur, ut
difficulter possit ab uteri strangulatione decerni, like fits
of the mother, Alvus plerisque nil reddit, aliis exiguum,
acre, biliosum, lotium flavum. They complain many times,
saith Mercatus, of a great pain in their heads, about their
hearts, and hypochondries, and so likewise in their breasts,
which are often sore, sometimes ready to swoon, their faces
are inflamed, and red, they are dry, thirsty, suddenly hot,
much troubled with wind, cannot sleep, &c. And from hence
proceed ferina deliramenta, a brutish kind of dotage,
troublesome sleep, terrible dreams in the night, subrusticus
pudor et verecundia ignava, a foolish kind of bashfulness to
some, perverse conceits and opinions, dejection of mind, much
discontent, preposterous judgment. They are apt to loathe,
dislike, disdain, to be weary of every object, &c., each
thing almost is tedious to them, they pine away, void of
counsel, apt to weep, and tremble, timorous, fearful, sad,
and out of all hope of better fortunes. They take delight in
nothing for the time, but love to be alone and solitary,
though that do them more harm: and thus they are affected so
long as this vapour lasteth; but by-and-by as pleasant and
merry as ever they were in their lives, they sing, discourse,
and laugh in any good company, upon all occasions, and so by
fits it takes them now and then, except the malady be
inveterate, and then 'tis more frequent, vehement, and
continuate. Many of them cannot tell how to express
themselves in words, or how it holds them, what ails them,
you cannot understand them, or well tell what to make of
their sayings; so far gone sometimes, so stupified and
distracted, they think themselves bewitched, they are in
despair, aptae ad fletum, desperationem, dolores mammis et
hypochondriis. Mercatus therefore adds, now their breasts,
now their hypochondries, belly and sides, then their heart
and head aches, now heat, then wind, now this, now that
offends, they are weary of all; and yet will not, cannot
again tell how, where or what offends them, though they be in
great pain, agony, and frequently complain, grieving,
sighing, weeping, and discontented still, sine causa
manifesta, most part, yet I say they will complain, grudge,
lament, and not be persuaded, but that they are troubled with
an evil spirit, which is frequent in Germany, saith
Rodericus, amongst the common sort: and to such as are most
grievously affected (for he makes three degrees of this
disease in women), they are in despair, surely forespoken or
bewitched, and in extremity of their dotage (weary of their
lives), some of them will attempt to make away themselves.
Some think they see visions, confer with spirits and devils,
they shall surely be damned, are afraid of some treachery,
imminent danger, and the like, they will not speak, make
answer to any question, but are almost distracted, mad, or
stupid for the time, and by fits: and thus it holds them, as
they are more or less affected, and as the inner humour is
intended or remitted, or by outward objects and perturbations
aggravated, solitariness, idleness, &c.

Many other maladies there are incident to young women, out of
that one and only causes above specified, many feral
diseases. I will not so much as mention their names,
melancholy alone is the subject of my present discourse, from
which I will not swerve. The several cures of this infirmity,
concerning diet, which must be very sparing, phlebotomy,
physic, internal, external remedies are at large in great
variety in Rodericus a Castro, Sennertus, and Mercatus, which
whoso will, as occasion serves, may make use of. But the best
and surest remedy of all, is to see them well placed, and
married to good husbands in due time, hinc illae lachrymae,
that is the primary cause, and this the ready cure, to give
them content to their desires. I write not this to patronise
any wanton, idle flirt, lascivious or light housewives, which
are too forward many times, unruly, and apt to cast away
themselves on him that comes next, without all care, counsel,
circumspection, and judgment. If religion, good discipline,
honest education, wholesome exhortation, fair promises, fame
and loss of good name, cannot inhibit and deter such (which
to chaste and sober maids cannot choose but avail much),
labour and exercise, strict diet, rigour and threats, may
more opportunely be used, and are able of themselves to
qualify and divert an ill-disposed temperament. For seldom
should you see an hired servant, a poor handmaid, though
ancient, that is kept hard to her work, and bodily labour, a
coarse country wench troubled in this kind, but noble
virgins, nice gentlewomen, such as are solitary and idle,
live at ease, lead a life out of action and employment, that
fare well, in great houses and jovial companies, ill disposed
peradventure of themselves, and not willing to make any
resistance, discontented otherwise, of weak judgment, able
bodies, and subject to passions, (grandiores virgines, saith
Mercatus, steriles et viduae plerumque melancholicae), such
for the most part are misaffected, and prone to this disease.
I do not so much pity them that may otherwise be eased, but
those alone that out of a strong temperament, innate
constitution, are violently carried away with this torrent of
inward hmnours, and though very modest of themselves, sober,
religious, virtuous, and well given (as many so distressed
maids are), yet cannot make resistance, these grievances will
appear, this malady will take place, and now manifestly show
itself and may not otherwise be helped. But where am I? Into
what subject have I rushed? What have I to do with nuns,
maids, virgins, widows? I am a bachelor myself and lead a
monastic life in a college, noe ego sane ineptos qui haec
dixerim, I confess 'tis an indecorum, and as Pallas a virgin
blushed, when Jupiter by chance spoke of love matters in her
presence, and turned away her face; me reprimam, though my
subject necessarily require it, I will say no more.

And yet I must and will say something more, add a word or two
in gratiam Virginum et Viduarum, in favour of all such
distressed parties, in commiseration of their present estate.
And as I cannot choose but condole their mishap that labour
of this infirmity, and are destitute of help in this case, so
must I needs inveigh against them that are in fault, more
than manifest causes, and as bitterly tax those tyrannising
pseudo-politicians superstitious orders, rash vows, hard-
hearted parents, guardians, unnatural friends, allies (call
them how you will), those careless and stupid overseers, that
out of worldly respects, covetousness, supine negligence,
their own private ends (cum sibi sit interim bene) can so
severely reject, stubbornly neglect, and impiously contemn,
without all remorse and pity, the tears, sighs, groans, and
grievous miseries of such poor souls committed to their
charge. How odious and abominable are those superstitious and
rash vows of Popish monasteries! so to bind and enforce men
and women to vow virginity, to lead a single life, against
the laws of nature, opposite to religion, policy, and
humanity, so to starve, to offer violence, to suppress the
vigour of youth by rigorous statutes, severe laws, vain
persuasions, to debar them of that to which by their innate
temperature they are so furiously inclined, urgently carried,
and sometimes precipitated, even irresistibly led, to the
prejudice of their soul's health, and good estate of body and
mind: and all for base and private respects, to maintain
their gross superstition, to enrich themselves and their
territories, as they falsely suppose, by hindering some
marriages, that the world be not full of beggars, and their
parishes pestered with orphans; stupid politicians, haeccine
fieri flagitia? ought these things so to be carried? better
marry than burn, saith the Apostle, but they are otherwise
persuaded. They will by all means quench their neighbour's
house if it be on fire, but that fire of lust which breaks
out into such lamentable flames, they will not take notice
of, their own bowels oftentimes, flesh and blood shall so
rage and burn, and they will not see it: miserum est, saith
Austin, seipsum non miserescere, and they are miserable in
the mean time that cannot pity themselves, the common good of
all, and per consequens their own estates. For let them but
consider what fearful maladies, feral diseases, gross
inconveniences, come to both sexes by this enforced
temperance, it troubles me to think of, much more to relate
those frequent abortions and murdering of infants in their
nunneries (read Kemnitius and others), their notorious
fornications, those Spintrias, Tribadas, Ambubeias, &c.,
those rapes, incests, adulteries, mastuprations, sodomies,
buggeries of monks and friars. See Bale's visitation of
abbeys, Mercurialis, Rodericus a Castro, Peter Forestus, and
divers physicians; I know their ordinary apologies and
excuses for these things, sed viderint Politici, Medici,
Theologi, I shall more opportunely meet with them elsewhere

"Illius viduae, aut patronum Virginus hujus,
Ne me forte putes, verbum non amplius addam."
("Lest you may imagine that I patronise this widow or that
virgin, I shall not add another word")



MEMB. III.

Immediate cause of these precedent Symptoms.


To give some satisfaction to melancholy men that are troubled
with these symptoms, a better means in my judgment cannot be
taken, than to show them the causes whence they proceed; not
from devils as they suppose, or that they are bewitched or
forsaken of God, hear or see, &c., as many of them think, but
from natural and inward causes, that so knowing them, they
may better avoid the effects, or at least endure them with
more patience. The most grievous and common symptoms are fear
and sorrow, and that without a cause to the wisest and
discreetest men, in this malady not to be avoided. The reason
why they are so Aetius discusseth at large, Tetrabib. 2.2. in
his first problem out of Galen, lib. 2 de causis sympt. 1.
For Galen imputeth all to the cold that is black, and thinks
that the spirits being darkened, and the substance of the
brain cloudy and dark, all the objects thereof appear
terrible, and the mind itself; by those dark, obscure, gross
fumes, ascending from black humours, is in continual
darkness, fear, and sorrow; divers terrible monstrous
fictions in a thousand shapes and apparitions occur, with
violent passions, by which the brain and phantasy are
troubled and eclipsed. Frascastorius, lib. 2 de intellect.
"will have cold to be the cause of fear and sorrow; for such
as are cold are ill-disposed to mirth, dull, and heavy, by
nature solitary, silent; and not for any inward darkness (as
physicians think) for many melancholy men dare boldly be,
continue, and walk in the dark, and delight in it:" solum
frigidi timidi: if they be hot, they are merry; and the more
hot, the more furious, and void of fear, as we see in madmen;
but this reason holds not, for then no melancholy, proceeding
from choler adust, should fear. Averroes scoffs at Galen for
his reasons, and brings five arguments to repel them: so doth
Herc. de Saxonia, Tract. de Melanch. cap. 3. assigning other
causes, which are copiously censured and confuted by Aelianus
Montaltus, cap. 5 and 6, Lod. Mercatus de Inter. morb. cur.
lib. 1. cap. 17, Altomarus, cap. 7. de mel., Guianerius,
tract. 15. cap. 1, Bright, cap. 37, Laurentius, cap. 5,
Valesius, med. cont. lib. 5, con. 1. "Distemperature," they
conclude, "makes black juice, blackness obscures the spirits,
the spirits obscured, cause fear and sorrow." Laurentius,
cap. 13. supposeth these black fumes offend specially the
diaphragma or midriff; and so per consequens the mind, which
is obscured as a the sun by a cloud. To this opinion of
Galen, almost all the Greeks and Arabians subscribe, the
Latins new and old, internae tenebrae obfuscant animum, ut
externae nocent pueris, as children are affrighted in the
dark, so are melancholy men at all times, as having the
inward cause with them, and still carrying it about. Which
black vapours, whether they proceed from the black blood
about the heart, as T. W. Jes. thinks in his Treatise of the
passions of the mind, or stomach, spleen, midriff; or all the
misaffected parts together, it boots not, they keep the mind
in a perpetual dungeon, and oppress it with continual fears,
anxieties, sorrows, &c. It is an ordinary thing for such as
are sound to laugh at this dejected pusillanimity, and those
other symptoms of melancholy, to make themselves merry with
them, and to wonder at such, as toys and trifles, which may
be resisted and withstood, if they will themselves: but let
him that so wonders, consider with himself; that if a man
should tell him on a sudden, some of his especial friends
were dead, could he choose but grieve? Or set him upon a
steep rock, where he should be in danger to be precipitated,
could he be secure? His heart would tremble for fear, and his
head be giddy. P. Byarus, Tract. depest. gives instance (as I
have said) "and put case (saith he) in one that walks upon a
plank, if it lie on the ground, he can safely do it: but if
the same plank be laid over some deep water, instead of a
bridge, he is vehemently moved, and 'tis nothing but his
imagination, forma cadendi impressa, to which his other
members and faculties obey." Yea, but you infer, that such
men have a just cause to fear, a true object of fear; so have
melancholy men an inward cause, a perpetual fume and
darkness, causing fear, grief; suspicion, which they carry
with them, an object which cannot be removed; but sticks as
close, and is as inseparable as a shadow to a body, and who
can expel or overrun his shadow? Remove heat of the liver, a
cold stomach, weak spleen: remove those adust humours and
vapours arising from them, black blood from the heart, all
outward perturbations, take away the cause, and then bid them
not grieve nor fear, or be heavy, dull, lumpish, otherwise
counsel can do little good; you may as well bid him that is
sick of an ague not to be a-dry; or him that is wounded not
to feel pain.

Suspicion follows fear and sorrow at heels, arising out of
the same fountain, so thinks Frascatorius, "that fear is the
cause of suspicion, and still they suspect some treachery, or
some secret machination to be framed against them, still they
distrust." Restlessness proceeds from the same spring,
variety of fumes make them like and dislike. Solitariness,
avoiding of light, that they are weary of their lives, hate
the world, arise from the same causes, for their spirits and
humours are opposite to light, fear makes them avoid company,
and absent themselves, lest they should be misused, hissed
at, or overshoot themselves, which still they suspect. They
are prone to venery by reason of wind. Angry, waspish, and
fretting still, out of abundance of choler, which causeth
fearful dreams and violent perturbations to them, both
sleeping and waking: That they suppose they have no heads,
fly, sink, they are pots, glasses, &c., is wind in their
heads. Herc. de Saxonia doth ascribe this to the several
motions in the animal spirits, "their dilation, contraction,
confusion, alteration, tenebrosity, hot or cold
distemperature," excluding all material humours. Fracastorius
"accounts it a thing worthy of inquisition, why they should 
entertain such false conceits, as that they have horns, great
noses, that they are birds, beasts," &., why they should
think themselves kings, lords, cardinals. For the first,
Fracastorius gives two reasons: "One is the disposition of
the body; the other, the occasion of the phantasy," as if
their eyes be purblind, their ears sing, by reason of some
cold and rheum, &c. To the second, Laurentius answers, the
imagination inwardly or outwardly moved, represents to the
understanding, not enticements only, to favour the passion or
dislike, but a very intensive pleasure follows the passion or
displeasure, and the will and reason are captivated by
delighting in it.

Why students and lovers are so often melancholy and mad, the
philosopher of Conimbra assigns this reason, "because by a
vehement and continual meditation of that wherewith they are
affected, they fetch up the spirits into the brain, and with
the heat brought with them, they incend it beyond measure:
and the cells of the inner senses dissolve their temperature,
which being dissolved, they cannot perform their offices as
they ought."

Why melancholy men are witty, which Aristotle hath long since
maintained in his problems; and that all learned men, famous
philosophers, and lawgivers, ad unum fere omnes melancholici,
have still been melancholy, is a problem much controverted.
Jason Pratensis will have it understood of natural
melancholy, which opinion Melancthon inclines to, in his book
de Anima, and Marcilius Ficinus, de san. tuend. lib. 1. cap.
5. but not simple, for that makes men stupid, heavy, dull,
being cold and dry, fearful, fools, and solitary, but mixed
with the other humours, phlegm only excepted; and they not
adust, but so mixed as that blood be half, with little or no
adustion, that they be neither too hot nor too cold.
Apponensis, cited by Melancthon, thinks it proceeds from
melancholy adust, excluding all natural melancholy as too
cold. Laurentius condemns his tenet, because adustion of
humours makes men mad, as lime burns when water is cast on
it. It must be mixed with blood, and somewhat adust, and so
that old aphorism of Aristotle may be verified, Nullum magnum
ingenium sine mixtura dementiae, no excellent wit without a
mixture of madness. Fracastorius shall decide the
controversy, "phlegmatic are dull: sanguine lively, pleasant,
acceptable, and merry, but not witty: choleric are too swift
in motion, and furious, impatient of contemplation, deceitful
wits: melancholy men have the most excellent wits, but not
all; this humour may be hot or cold, thick or thin; if too
hot, they are furious and mad: if too cold, dull, stupid,
timorous, and sad: if temperate, excellent, rather inclining
to that extreme of heat, than cold." This sentence of his
will agree with that of Heraclitus, a dry light makes a wise
mind, temperate heat and dryness are the chief causes of a
good wit; therefore, saith Aelian, an elephant is the wisest
of all brute beasts, because his brain is driest, et ob atrae
bilis copiam: this reason Cardan approves, subtil. l. 12. Jo.
Baptista Silvaticus, a physician of Milan, in his first
controversy, hath copiously handled this question: Rulandus
in his problems, Caelius Rhodiginus, lib. 17, Valleriola 6to
narrat. med., Herc. de Saxonia, Tract. posth. de mel. cap. 3,
Lodovicus Mercatus, de inter. morb. cur. lib. 1. cap. 17,
Baptista Porta, Physiog. lib. 1. c. 13, and many others.

Weeping, sighing, laughing, itching, trembling, sweating,
blushing, hearing and seeing strange noises, vision; wind,
crudity, are motions of the body, depending upon the
precedent motions of the mind: neither are tears, affections,
but actions (as Scaliger holds) "the voice of such as are
afraid, trembles, because the heart is shaken," (Conimb.
prob. 6. sec. 3. de som.) why they stutter or falter in their
speech. Mercarialis and Montaltus, cap. 17. give like reasons
out of Hippocrates, "dryness, which makes the nerves of the
tongue torpid." Fast speaking (which is a symptom of some
few) Aetius will have caused from "abundance of wind, and
swiftness of imagination: baldness comes from excess of
dryness," hirsuteness from a dry temperature. The cause of
much waking in a dry brain, continual meditation, discontent,
fears and cares, that suffer not the mind to be at rest,
incontinency is from wind, and a hot liver, Montanus, cons.
26. Rambling in the guts is caused from wind, and wind from
ill concoction, weakness of natural heat, or a distempered
heat and cold. Palpitation of the heart from vapours,
heaviness and aching from the same cause. That the belly is
hard, wind is a cause, and of that leaping in many parts.
Redness of the face, and itching, as if they were flea-
bitten, or stung with pismires, from a sharp subtile wind.
Cold sweat from vapours arising from the hypochondries, which
pitch upon the skin; leanness for want of good nourishment.
Why their appetite is so great, Aetius answers: Os ventris
frigescit, cold in those inner parts, cold belly, and hot
liver, causeth crudity, and intention proceeds from
perturbations, our souls for want of spirits cannot attend
exactly to so many intentive operations, being exhaust, and
overswayed by passion, she cannot consider the reasons which
may dissuade her from such affections.

Bashfulness and blushing is a passion proper to men alone,
and is not only caused for some shame and ignominy, or that
they are guilty unto themselves of some foul fact committed,
but as Fracastorius well determines, ob defectum proprium, et
timorem, "from fear, and a conceit of our defects; the face
labours and is troubled at his presence that sees our
defects, and nature, willing to help, sends thither heat,
heat draws the subtilest blood, and so we blush. They that
are bold, arrogant, and careless, seldom or never blush, but
such as are fearful." Anthonius Lodovicus, in his book de
pudore, will have this subtile blood to arise in the face,
not so much for the reverence of our betters in presence,
"but for joy and pleasure, or if any thing at unawares shall
pass from us, a sudden accident, occurse, or meeting;" (which
Disarius in Macrobius confirms) any object heard or seen, for
blind men never blush, as Dandinus observes, the night and
darkness make men impudent. Or that we be staid before our
betters, or in company we like not, or if any thing molest
and offend us, erubescentia turns to rubor, blushing to a
continuate redness. Sometimes the extremity of the ears
tingle, and are red, sometimes the whole face, Etsi nihil
vitiosum commiseris, as Lodovicus holds: though Aristotle is
of opinion, omnis pudor ex vitio commisso, all shame for some
offence. But we find otherwise, it may as well proceed from
fear, from force and inexperience (so Dandinus holds), as
vice; a hot liver, saith Duretus (notis in Hollerium:) "from
a hot brain, from wind, the lungs heated, or after drinking
of wine, strong drink, perturbations," &c.

"Laughter, what it is," saith Tully, "how caused, where, and
so suddenly breaks out, that desirous to stay it, we cannot,
how it comes to possess and stir our face, veins, eyes,
countenance, mouth, sides, let Democritus determine." The
cause that it often affects melancholy men so much, is given
by Gomesius, lib. 3. de sale genial. cap. 18. abundance of
pleasant vapours, which, in sanguine melancholy especially,
break from the heart, "and tickle the midriff, because it is
transverse and full of nerves: by which titillation, the
sense being moved, and arteries distended or pulled, the
spirits from thence move and possess the sides, veins,
countenance, eyes." See more in Jossius de risu et fletu,
Vives 3 de Anima. Tears, as Scaliger defines, proceed from
grief and pity, "or from the heating of a moist brain, for a
dry cannot weep."

That they see and hear so many phantasms, chimeras, noises,
visions, &c. as Fienus hath discoursed at large in his book
of imagination, and Lavater de spectris, part. 1. cap. 2. 3.
4. their corrupt phantasy makes them see and hear that which
indeed is neither heard nor seen, Qui multum jejunant, aut
noctes ducunt insomnes, they that much fast, or want sleep,
as melancholy or sick men commonly do, see visions, or such
as are weak-sighted, very timorous by nature, mad,
distracted, or earnestly seek. Sabini quod volunt somniant,
as the saying is, they dream of that they desire. Like
Sarmiento the Spaniard, who when he was sent to discover the
straits of Magellan, and confine places, by the Prorex of
Peru, standing on the top of a hill, Amoenissimam planitiem
despicere sibi visus fuit, aedificia magnfica, quamplurimos
Pagos, altas Turres, splendida Templa, and brave cities,
built like ours in Europe, not, saith mine author, that there
was any such thing, but that he was vanissimus et nimis
credulus, and would fain have had it so. Or as Lod. Mercatus
proves, by reason of inward vapours, and humours from blood,
choler, &c., diversely mixed, they apprehend and see
outwardly, as they suppose, divers images, which indeed are
not. As they that drink wine think all runs round, when it is
in their own brain; so is it with these men, the fault and
cause is inward, as Galen affirms, mad men and such as are
near death, quas extra se videre putant Imagines, intra
oculos habent, 'tis in their brain, which seems to be before
them; the brain as a concave glass reflects solid bodies.
Senes etiam decrepiti cerebrum habent concavum et aridum, ut
imaginentur se videre (saith Boissardus) quae non sunt, old
men are too frequently mistaken and dote in like case: or as
he that looketh through a piece of red glass, judgeth
everything he sees to be red; corrupt vapours mounting from
the body to the head, and distilling again from thence to the
eyes, when they have mingled themselves with the watery
crystal which receiveth the shadows of things to be seen,
make all things appear of the same colour, which remains in
the humour that overspreads our sight, as to melancholy men
all is black, to phlegmatic all white, &c. Or else as before
the organs, corrupt by a corrupt phantasy, as Lemnius, lib.
1. cap. 16. well quotes, "cause a great agitation of spirits,
and humours, which wander to and fro in all the creeks of the
brain, and cause such apparitions before their eyes." One
thinks he reads something written in the moon, as Pythagoras
is said to have done of old, another smells brimstone, hears
Cerberus bark: Orestes now mad supposed he saw the furies
tormenting him, and his mother still ready to run upon him --

"O mater obsecro noli me persequi
His furiis, aspectu anguineis, horribilibus,
Ecce ecce me invadunt, in me jam ruunt"
("O mother! I beseech you not to persecute me with those
horrible-looking furies. See! see! they attack, they assault
me!")
but Electra told him thus raving in his mad fit, he saw no
such sights at all, it was but his crazed imagination.
"Quiesce, quiesce miser in linteis tuis,
Non cernis etiam quae videre te putas."
"Peace! peace! unhappy being, for you do not see what you
think you see."


So Pentheus (in Bacchis Euripidis) saw two suns, two Thebes,
his brain alone was troubled. Sickness is an ordinary cause
of such sights. Cardan, subtil. 8. Mens aegra laboribus et
jejunis fracta, facit eos videre, audire, &c. And. Osiander
beheld strange visions, and Alexander ab Alexandro both, in
their sickness, which he relates de rerum varietal. lib. 8.
cap. 44. Albategnius that noble Arabian, on his death-bed,
saw a ship ascending and descending, which Fracastorius
records of his friend Baptista Tirrianus. Weak sight and a
vain persuasion withal, may effect as much, and second causes
concurring, as an oar in water makes a refraction, and seems
bigger, bended, double, &c. The thickness of the air may
cause such effects, or any object not well discerned in the
dark, fear and phantasy will suspect to be a ghost, a devil,
&c. Quod nimis miseri timent,hoc facile credunt, we are apt
to believe, and mistake in such cases. Marcellus Donatus,
lib. 2. cap. 1. brings in a story out of Aristotle, of one
Antepharon which likely saw, wheresoever he was, his own
image in the air, as in a glass. Vitellio, lib. 10. perspect.
hath such another instance of a familiar acquaintance of his,
that after the want of three or four nights' sleep, as he was
riding by a river side, saw another riding with him, and
using all such gestures as he did, but when more light
appeared, it vanished. Eremites and anchorites have
frequently such absurd visions, revelations by reason of much
fasting, and bad diet, many are deceived by legerdemain, as
Scot hath well showed in his book of the discovery of
witchcraft, and Cardan, subtil. 18. suffites, perfumes,
suffumigations, mixed candles, perspective glasses, and such
natural causes, make men look as if they were dead, or with
horse-heads, bulls'-horns, and such like brutish shapes, the
room full of snakes, adders, dark, light, green, red, of all
colours, as you may perceive in Baptista Porta, Alexis,
Albertus, and others, glow-worms, fire-drakes, meteors, Ignis
fatuus, which Plinius, lib. 2. cap. 3. calls Castor and
Pollux, with many such that appear in moorish grounds, about
churchyards, moist valleys, or where battles have been
fought, the causes of which read in Goclenius, Velourius,
Finkius, &c., such fears are often done, to frighten children
with squibs, rotten wood, &c., to make folks look as if they
were dead, solito majores, bigger, lesser, fairer, fouler, ut
astantes sine capitibus videantur; aut toti igniti, aut forma
daemonum, accipe pilos canis nigri, &c., saith Albertus; and
so 'tis ordinary to see strange uncouth sights by catoptrics;
who knows not that if in a dark room, the light be admitted
at one only little hole, and a paper or glass put upon it,
the sun shining, will represent on the opposite wall all such
objects as are illuminated by his rays? with concave and
cylinder glasses, we may reflect any shape of men, devils,
antics (as magicians most part do, to gull a silly spectator
in a dark room), we will ourselves, and that hanging in the
air, when 'tis nothing but such an horrible image as Agrippa
demonstrates, placed in another room. Roger Bacon of old is
said to have represented his own image walking in the air by
this art, though no such thing appear in his perspectives.
But most part it is in the brain that deceives them, although
I may not deny, but that oftentimes the devil deludes them,
takes his opportunity to suggest, and represent vain objects
to melancholy men, and such as are ill-affected. To these you
may add the knavish impostures of jugglers, exorcists, mass-
priests, and mountebanks, of whom Roger Bacon speaks, &c., de
miraculis naturae et artis, cap. 1. they can counterfeit the
voices of all birds and brute beasts almost, all tones and
tunes of men, and speak within their throats, as if they
spoke afar off that they make their auditors believe they
hear spirits, and are thence much astonished and affrighted
with it. Besides, those artificial devices to over-hear their
confessions, like that whispering place of Gloucester with
us, or like the duke's place at Mantua in Italy, where the
sound is reverberated by a concave wall; a reason of which
Blancanus in his Echometria gives, and mathematically
demonstrates.

So that the hearing is as frequently deluded as the sight,
from the same causes almost, as he that hears bells, will
make them sound what he list. "As the fool thinketh, so the
bell clinketh." Theophilus in Galen thought he heard music
from vapours, which made his ears sound, &c. Some are
deceived by echoes, some by roaring of waters, or concaves
and reverberation of air in the ground, hollow places and
walls. At Cadurcum, in Aquitaine, words and sentences are
repeated by a strange echo to the full, or whatsoever you
shall play upon a musical instrument, more distinctly and
louder, than they are spoken at first. Some echoes repeat a
thing spoken seven times, as at Olympus, in Macedonia, as
Pliny relates, lib. 36, cap. 15. Some twelve times, as at
Charenton, a village near Paris, in France. At Delphos, in
Greece, heretofore was a miraculous echo, and so in many
other places. Cardan, subtil. l. 18, hath wonderful stories
of such as have been deluded by these echoes. Blancanus the
Jesuit, in his Echometria, hath variety of examples, and
gives his reader full satisfaction of all such sounds by way
of demonstration. At Barrey, an isle in the Severn mouth,
they seem to hear a smith's forge: so at Lipari, and those
sulphureous isles, and many such like which Olaus speaks of
in the continent of Scandia, and those northern countries.
Cardan, de rerum var. l. 15, c. 84, mentioneth a woman, that
still supposed she heard the devil call her, and speaking to
her, she was a painter's wife in Milan: and many such
illusions and voices, which proceed most part from a corrupt
imagination.

Whence it comes to pass, that they prophesy, speak several
languages, talk of astronomy, and other unknown sciences to
them (of which they have been ever ignorant): I have in brief
touched, only this I will here add, that Arculanus, Bodin.
lib. 3. cap. 6, daemon. and some others, hold as a manifest
token that such persons are possessed with the devil; so doth
Hercules de Saxonia, and Apponensis, and fit only to be cured
by a priest. But Guianerius, Montaltus, Pomponatius of Padua,
and Lemnius, lib. 2, cap. 2, refer it wholly to the ill-
disposition of the humour, and that out of the authority of
Aristotle, prob. 30. 1, because such symptoms are cured by
purging; and as by the striking of a flint fire is enforced,
so by the vehement motion of spirits, they do elicere voces
inauditas, compel strange speeches to be spoken: another
argument he hath from Plato's reminiscentia, which all out as
likely as that which Marsilius Ficinus speaks of his friend
Pierleonus; by a divine kind of infusion he understood the
secrets of nature, and tenets of Grecian and barbarian
philosophers, before ever he heard of, saw, or read their
works: but in this I should rather hold with Avicenna and his
associates, that such symptoms proceed from evil spirits,
which take all opportunities of humours decayed, or otherwise
to pervert the soul of man: and besides, the humour itself is
Balneum Diaboli, the devil's bath; and as Agrippa proves,
doth entice him to seize upon them.



SECT. IV. MEMB. I.
Prognostics of Melancholy.


PROGNOSTICS, or signs of things to come, are either good or
bad. If this malady be not hereditary, and taken at the
beginning, there is good hope of cure, recens curationem non
habet difficilem, saith Avicenna, l. 3, Fen. 1, Tract. 4, c.
18. That which is with laughter, of all others is most
secure, gentle, and remiss, Hercules de Saxonia. "If that
evacuation of haeemorrhoids, or varices, which they call the
water between the skin, shall happen to a melancholy man, his
misery is ended," Hippocrates, Aphor. 6. 11. Galen, l. 6, de
morbis vulgar. com. 8, confirms the same; and to this
aphorism of Hippocrates, all the Arabians, new and old Latins
subscribe; Montaltus, c. 25, Hercules de Saxonia,
Mercurialis, Vittorius Faventinus, &c. Skenckius, l. 1,
observat. med. c. de Mania, illustrates this aphorism, with
an example of one Daniel Federer a coppersmith that was long
melancholy, and in the end mad, about the 27th year of his
age, these varices or water began to arise in his thighs, and
he was freed from his madness. Marius the Roman was so cured,
some say, though with great pain. Skenckius hath some other
instances of women that have been helped by flowing of their
months, which before were stopped. That the opening of the
haemorrhoids will do as much for men, all physicians jointly
signify, so they be voluntary, some say, and not by
compulsion. All melancholy are better after a quartan;
Jobertus saith, scarce any man hath that ague twice; but
whether it free him from this malady, 'tis a question; for
many physicians ascribe all long agues for especial causes,
and a quartan ague amongst the rest. Rhasis, cont. lib. 1,
tract. 9. "When melancholy gets out at the superficies of the
skin, or settles breaking out in scabs, leprosy, morphew, or
is purged by stools, or by the urine, or that the spleen is
enlarged, and those varices appear, the disease is
dissolved." Guianerius, cap. 5, tract. 15, adds dropsy,
jaundice, dysentery, leprosy, as good signs to these scabs,
morphews, and breaking out, and proves it out of the 6th of
Hippocrates Aphorisms.

Evil prognostics on the other part. Inveterata melancholia
incurabilis, if it be inveterate, it is incurable, a common
axiom, aut difficulter curabilis as they say that make the
best, hardly cured. This Galen witnesseth, l. 3, de loc.
affect, cap. 6, "be it in whom it will, or from what cause
soever, it is ever long, wayward, tedious, and hard to be
cured, if once it be habituated." As Lucian said of the gout,
she was "the queen of diseases, and inexorable," may we say
of melancholy. Yet Paracelsus will have all diseases
whatsoever curable, and laughs at them which think otherwise,
as T. Erastus, par. 3, objects to him; although in another
place, hereditary diseases he accounts incurable, and by no
art to be removed. Hildesheim, spicel. 2, de mel. holds it
less dangerous if only "imagination be hurt, and not reason,"
the gentlest is from blood. Worse from choler adust, but the
worst of all from melancholy putrefied." Bruel esteems
hypochondriacal least dangerous, and the other two species
(opposite to Galen) hardest to be cured. The cure is hard in
men, but much more difficult in women. And both men and women
must take notice of that saying of Montanus, consil. 230, pro
Abate Italo, "This malady doth commonly accompany them to
their grave; physicians may ease, and it may lie hid for a
time, but they cannot quite cure it, but it will return again
more violent and sharp than at first, and that upon every
small occasion or error:" as in Mercury's weather-beaten
statue, that was once all over gilt, the open parts were
clean, yet there was in fimbriis aurum, in the chinks a
remnant of gold: there will be some relics of melancholy left
in the purest bodies (if once tainted) not so easily to be
rooted out. Oftentimes it degenerates into epilepsy,
apoplexy, convulsions, and blindness: by the authority of
Hippocrates and Galen, all aver, if once it possess the
ventricles of the brain, Frambesarius, and Salust. Salvianus
adds, if it get into the optic nerves, blindness.
Mercurialis, consil. 20, had a woman to his patient, that
from melancholy became epileptic and blind. If it come from a
cold cause, or so continue cold, or increase, epilepsy;
convulsions follow, and blindness, or else in the end they
are moped, sottish, and in all their actions, speeches, and
gestures, ridiculous. If it come from a hot cause, they are
more furious, and boisterous, and in conclusion mad.
Calescentem melancholiam saepius sequitur mania. "If it heat
and increase, that is the common event, per circuitus, aut
semper insanit, he is mad by fits, or altogether. For as
Sennertus contends out of Crato, there is seminarius ignis in
this humour, the very seeds of fire. If it come from
melancholy natural adust, and in excess, they are often
demoniacal, Montanus.

Seldom this malady procures death, except (which is the
greatest, most grievous calamity, and the misery of all
miseries,) they make away themselves, which is a frequent
thing, and familiar amongst them. 'Tis Hippocrates'
observation, Galen's sentence: Etsi mortem timent, tamem
plerumque sibi ipsis mortem consciscunt, l. 3. de locis
affect. cap. 7. The doom of all physicians. 'Tis Rabbi Moses'
Aphorism, the prognosticon of Avicenna, Rhasis, Aetius,
Gordonius, Valescus, Altomarus, Salust. Salvianus,
Capivaccius, Mercatus, Hercules de Saxonia, Piso, Bruel,
Fuchsius, all, &c.

"Et saepe usque adeo mortis formidinae vitae
Percipit infelix odium lucisque videndae,
Ut sibi consciscat maerenti pectore lethum."
And so far forth death's, terror doth affright,
He makes away himself and hates the light:
To make an end of fear and grief of heart,
He voluntary dies to ease his smart."


In such sort doth the torture and extremity of his misery
torment him,that he can take no pleasure in his life, but is
in a manner enforced to offer violence unto himself, to be
freed from his present insufferable pains. So some (saith
Fracastorius) "in fury, but most in despair, sorrow, fear,
and out of the anguish and vexation of their souls, offer
violence to themselves: for their life is unhappy and
miserable. They can take no rest in the night, nor sleep, or
if they do slumber, fearful dreams astonish them." In the
day-time they are affrighted still by some terrible object,
and torn in pieces with suspicion, fear, sorrow, discontents,
cares, shame, anguish, &c., as so many wild horses, that they
cannot be quiet an hour, a minute of time, but even against
their wills they are intent, and still thinking of it, they
cannot forget it, it grinds their souls day and night, they
are perpetually tormented, a burden to themselves, as Job
was, they can neither eat, drink, or sleep. Psal. cvii. 18.
"Their soul abhorreth all meat, and they are brought to
death's door, being bound in misery and iron:" they curse
their stars with Job, "and day of their birth, and wish for
death:" for as Pineda and most interpreters hold, Job was
even melancholy to despair, and almost madness itself; they
murmur many times against the world, friends, allies, all
mankind, even against God himself in the bitterness of their
passion, vivere nolunt, mori nesciunt, live they will not,
die they cannot. And in the midst of these squalid, ugly, and
such irksome days, they seek at last, finding no comfort, no
remedy in this wretched life, to be eased of all by death.
Omnia appetunt bonum, all creatures seek the best, and for
their good as they hope, sub specie, in show at least, vel
quia mori pulchrum putant (saith Hippocrates) vel quia putant
inde se majoribus malis liberari, to be freed as they wish.
Though many times, as Aesop's fishes, they leap from the
frying-pan into the fire itself; yet they hope to be eased by
his means: and therefore (saith Felix Platerus) "after many
tedious days at last, either by drowning, hanging, or some
such fearful end," they precipitate or make away themselves:
"many lamentable examples are daily seen amongst us:" alius
ante fores se laqueo suspendit (as Seneca notes), alius se
praecipitant a tecto, ne dominum stomachantem audiret, alius
ne reduceretur a fuga ferrum redegit in viscera, "one hangs
himself before his own door,-- another throws himself from
the house-top, to avoid his master's anger,-- a third, to
escape expulsion, plunges a dagger into his heart,"-- so many
causes there are -- His amor exitio est, furor his -- love,
grief; anger, madness, and shame, &c. 'Tis a common calamity,
a fatal end to this disease, they are condemned to a violent
death, by a jury of physicians, furiously disposed, carried
headlong by their tyrannising wills, enforced by miseries,
and there remains no more to such persons, if that heavenly
Physician, by his assisting grace and mercy alone do not
prevent (for no human persuasion or art can help), but to be
their own butchers, and execute themselves. Socrates his
cicuta, Lucretia's dagger, Timon's halter, are yet to be had;
Cato's knife, and Nero's sword are less behind them, as so
many fatal engines, bequeathed to posterity, and will be used
to the world's end, by such distressed souls: so intolerable,
insufferable, grievous, and violent is their pain, so
unspeakable and continuate. One day of grief is an hundred
years, as Cardan observes: 'Tis carnificina hominum, angor
animi, as well saith Areteus, a plague of the soul, the cramp
and convulsion of the soul, an epitome of hell; and if there
be a hell upon earth, it is to be found in a melancholy man's
heart.

"For that deep torture may be call'd an hell,
When more is felt than one hath power to tell."

Yea, that which scoffing Lucian said of the gout in jest, I
may truly affirm of melancholy in earnest.

"O triste nomen! o diis odibile
Melancholia lacrymosa. Cocycti filia,
Tu Tartari specubus opacis edita
Erinnys, utero quam Megara suo tulit
Et ab uberibus aluit, cuique parvalae
Amarulentum in os lac Alecto dedit,
Omnes abominabilem te daemones
Produxere in lucem, exitio mortalium.
Non Jupiter ferit tale telum fulminis
Non ulla sic procella saevit aequoris,
Non impetuosi tanta vis est turbinis
An asperos sustineo morsus Cerberi?
Num virus Echidnae membra mea despacitur?
Aut tunica sanie tincta Nessi sanguinis
Idacrymabile et immedicabile malum hoc."

"O sad and odious name! a name so fell,
Is this of melancholy, brat of hell,
There born in hellish darkness doth it dwell.
The Furies brought it up, Megara's teat,
Alecto gave it bitter milk to eat.
And all conspired a bane to mortal men,
To bring this devil out of that black den.
et paulo post.
Jupiter's thunderbolt, not storm at sea.
Nor whirl-wind doth our hearts so much dismay.
What? am I bit by that fierce Cerberus?
Or stung by serpent so pestiferous!
Or put on shirt that's dipt in Nessus' blood?
My pain's past cure; physic can do no good."

No torture of body like unto it, Siculi non invenere tyranni
majus tormentum, no strappadoes, hot irons, Phalaris' bulls,

"Nec ira deum tantum, net tela, nec hostis,
Quantum sola noces animis illapsa."
"Jove's wrath, nor devils can
Do so much harm to th' soul of man."

All fears, griefs, suspicions, discontents, imbonities,
insuavities are swallowed up, and drowned in this Euripus,
this Irish sea, this ocean of misery, as so many small
brooks; 'tis coagulum omnium aerumnarum: which Ammianus
applied to his distressed Palladius. I say of our melancholy
man, he is the cream of human adversity, the quintessence,
and upshot; all other diseases whatsoever, are but flea-
bitings to melancholy in extent: 'Tis the pith of them all,
Hospitium est calamitatis; quid veris opus est?

"Quaecumque malam rem quaeris, illic reperies:"
"What need more words? 'tis calamities inn,
Where seek for any mischief, 'tis within;"
and a melancholy man is that true Prometheus, which is bound
to Caucasus; the true Titius, whose bowels are still by a
vulture devoured (as poets feign) for so doth Lilius Geraldus
interpret it, of anxieties, and those griping cares, and so
ought it to be understood. In all other maladies, we seek for
help, if a leg or an arm ache, through any distemperature or
wound, or that we have an ordinary disease, above all things
whatsoever, we desire help and health, a present recovery, if
by any means possible it may be procured; we will freely part
with all our other fortunes, substance, endure any misery,
drink bitter potions, swallow those distasteful pills, suffer
our joints to be seared, to be cut off, any thing for future
health: so sweet, so dear, so precious above all other things
in this world is life: 'tis that we chiefly desire, long life
and happy days, multos da, Jupiter, annos, increase of years
all men wish; but to a melancholy man, nothing so tedious,
nothing so odious; that which they so carefully seek to
preserve he abhors, he alone; so intolerable are his pains;
some make a question, graviores morbi corporis an animi,
whether the diseases of the body or mind be more grievous,
but there is no comparison, no doubt to be made of it, multo
enim saevior longeque est atrocior animi, quam corporis
cruciatus (Lem. l. 1. c. 12.) the diseases of the mind are
far more grievous.-- Totum hic pro vulnere corpus, body and
soul is misaffected here, but the soul especially. So Cardan
testifies, de rerum var. lib. 8. 40. Maximus Tyrius a
Platonist, and Plutarch, have made just volumes to prove it.
Dies adimit aegritudinem hominibus, in other diseases there
is some hope likely, but these unhappy men are born to
misery, past all hope of recovery, incurably sick, the longer
they live the worse they are, and death alone must ease them.

Another doubt is made by some philosophers, whether it be
lawful for a man, in such extremity of pain and grief; to
make away himself: and how these men that so do are to be
censured. The Platonists approve of it, that it is lawful in
such cases, and upon a necessity; Plotinus, l. de beatitud.
c. 7. and Socrates himself defends it, in Plato's Phaedon,
"if any man labour of an incurable disease, he may despatch
himself; if it be to his good." Epicurus and his followers,
the cynics and stoics in general, affirm it, Epictetus and
Seneca amongst the rest, quamcunque veram esse viam ad
libertatem, any way is allowable that leads to liberty, "let
us give God thanks, that no man is compelled to live against
his will;" quid ad hominem claustra, carcer, custodia?
liberum ostium habet, death is always ready and at hand.
Vides illum praecipitem locum, illud flumen, dost thou see
that steep place, that river, that pit, that tree, there's
liberty at hand, efugia servitutis et doloris sunt, as that
Laconian had cast himself headlong (non serviam, aiebat puer)
to be freed of his misery: every pain in thy body, if these
be nimis operosi exitus, will set thee free, quid tua refert
finem facias an accipias? there's no necessity for a man to
live in misery. Malum est necessitati vivere; sed in
necessitate vivere; necessitas nulla est. Ignavus qui sine
causa moritur, et stultus qui cum dolore vivit, Idem epi. 58.
Wherefore hath our mother the earth brought out poisons,
saith Pliny, in so great a quantity, but that men in distress
might make away themselves? which kings of old had ever in a
readiness, ad incerta fortunae venenum sub custode promptum,
Livy writes, and executioners always at hand. Speusippes
being sick was met by Diogenes, and, carried on his slaves'
shoulders, he made his moan to the philosopher; but I pity
thee not, quoth Diogenes, qui cum talis vivere sustines, thou
mayest be freed when thou wilt, meaning by death. Seneca 
therefore commends Cato, Dido, and Lucretia, for their
generous courage in so doing, and others that voluntarily
die, to avoid a greater mischief, to free themselves from
misery, to save their honour, or vindicate their good name,
as Cleopatra did, as Sophonisba, Syphax's wife did, Hannibal
did, as Junius Brutus, as Vibius Virius, and those Campanian
senators in Livy (Dec. 3. lib. 6.) to escape the Roman
tyranny, that poisoned themselves. Themistocles drank bull's
blood rather than he would fight against his country, and
Demosthenes chose rather to drink poison, Publius Crassi
filius, Censorius and Plancus, those heroical Romans to make
away themselves, than to fall into their enemies' hands. How
many myriads besides in all ages might I remember, qui sibi
lethum Insontes peperere manu? &c. Rhasis in the Maccabees is
magnified for it, Samson's death approved. So did Saul and
Jonas sin, and many worthy men and women, quorum memoria
celebratur in Ecclesia, saith Leminchus, for killing
themselves to save their chastity and honour, when Rome was
taken, as Austin instances, l. 1. de Civit. Dei, cap. 16.
Jerom vindicateth the same in Ionam; et Ambrose, l. 3. de
virginitate commendeth Pelagia for so doing. Eusebius, lib.
8. cap. 15. admires a Roman matron for the same fact to save
herself from the lust of Maxentius the Tyrant. Adelhelmus,
abbot of Malmesbury, calls them Beatas virgines quae sic, &c.
Titus Pomponius Atticus, that wise, discreet, renowned Roman
senator, Tully's dear friend, when he had been long sick, as
he supposed of an incurable disease, vitamque produceret ad
augendos dolores, sine spe salutis, was resolved voluntarily
by famine to despatch himself to be rid of his pain; and when
as Agrippa, and the rest of his weeping friends earnestly
besought him, osculantes obsecrarent ne id quod natura
cogeret, ipse acceleraret, not to offer violence to himself,
"with a settled resolution he desired again they would
approve of his good intent, and not seek to dehort him from
it:" and so constantly died, precesque eorum taciturna sua
obstinatione depressit. Even so did Corellius Rufus, another
grave senator, by the relation of Plinius Secundus, epist.
lib. 1. epist. l2. famish himself to death; pedibus correptus
cum incredibiles cruciatus et indignissima tormenta
pateretur, a cibis omnino abstinuit; ("Finding that he would
be destined to endure excruciating pain of the feet, and
additional tortures, he abstained from food altogether.")
neither he nor Hispilla his wife could divert him, but
destinatus more obstinate magis, &c., die he would, and die
he did. So did Lycurgus, Aristotle, Zeno, Chrysippus,
Empedocles, with myriads, &c. In wars, for a man to run
rashly upon imminent danger, and present death, is accounted
valour and magnanimity, to be the cause of his own, and many
a thousand's ruin besides, to commit wilful murder in a
manner, of himself and others, is a glorious thing, and he
shall be crowned for it. The Massagetae in former times,
Barbiccians, and I know not what nations besides, did stifle
their old men after seventy years, to free them from those
grievances incident to that age. So did the inhabitants of
the island of Choa, because their air was pure and good, and
the people generally long lived, antevertebant fatum suum,
priusquam manci forent aut imbecillitas accederet, papavere
vel cicuta, with poppy or hemlock they prevented death. Sir
Thomas More in his Utopia commends voluntary death, if he be
sibi aut aliis molestus, troublesome to himself or others
"(especially if to live be a torment to him), let him free
himself with his own hands from this tedious life, as from a
prison, or suffer himself to be freed by others." And 'tis 
the same tenet which Laertius relates of Zeno of old, Juste
sapiens sibi mortem consciscit, si in acerbis doloribus
versetur, membrorum mutilatione aut morbis aegre curandis,
and which Plato 9. de legibus approves, if old age, poverty,
ignominy, &c., oppress, and which Fabius expreseth in effect.
(Praefat. 7. Institut.) Nemo nisi sua culpa diu dolet. It is
an ordinary thing in China, (saith Mat. Riccius the jesuit,)
"if they be in despair of better fortunes, or tired and
tortured with misery, to bereave themselves of life, and many
times, to spite their enemies the more, to hang at their
door." Tacitus the historian, Plutarch the philosopher, much
approve a voluntary departure, and Aust. de civ. Dei., l. 1.
c. 29. defends a violent death, so that it be undertaken in a
good cause, nemo sic mortuus, qui non fuerat aliquando
moriturus; quid autem interest quo mortis genere vita ista
finiatur, quando ille cui finitur, iterum mori non cogitur?
&c., (No one ever died in this way, who would not have died
sometime or other; but what does it signify how life itself
may be ended, since he who comes to the end is not obliged to
die a second time?) no man so voluntarily dies, but volens
nolens, he must die at last, and our life is subject to
innumerable casualties, who knows when they may happen, utrum
satius est unam perpeti moniendo, an omnes timere vivendo,
rather suffer one, than fear all. "Death is better than a
bitter life," Ecclus. xxx. 17. and a harder choice to live in
fear, than, by once dying, to be freed from all. Theombrotus
Ambraciotes persuaded I know not how many hundreds of his
auditors, by a luculent oration he made of the miseries of
this, and happiness of that other life, to precipitate
themselves. And having read Plato's divine tract de anima,
for example's sake led the way first. That neat epigram of
Callimachus will tell you as much,

"Jamque vale Soli cum diceret Ambrociotes,
In Stygios fertur desiluisse lacus,
Morte nihil dignum passus: sed forte Platonis
Divini eximium de nece legit opus."
("And now when Ambrociotes was bidding farewell to the light
of day, and about to cast himself into the Stygian pool,
although he had not been guilty of any crime that merited
death: but, perhaps, he had read that divine work of Plato
upon Death.")

Calenus and his Indians hated of old to die a natural death:
the Circumcellians and Donatists, loathing life, compelled
others to make them away, with many such: but these are false
and pagan positions, profane stoical paradoxes, wicked
examples, it boots not what heathen philosophers determine in
this kind, they are impious, abominable, and upon a wrong
ground. "No evil is to be done that good may come of it;"
reclamat Christus, reclamat Scriptura, God, and all good men
are against it: He that stabs another can kill his body; but
he that stabs himself; kills his own soul. Male meretur qui
dat mendico quod edat; nam et illud quod dat perit; et illi
producit vitam ad miseriam: he that gives a beggar an alms
(as that comical poet saith) doth ill, because he doth but
prolong his miseries. But Lactantius, l. 6. c. 7. de vero
cultu, calls it a detestable opinion, and fully confutes it,
lib. 3. de sap. cap. 18. and S. Austin. ep. 2. ad Macedonium,
cap. 61. ad Dulcitium Tribunum: so doth Hierom to Marcella of
Blesilla's death, Non recipio tales animas, &c., he calls
such men martyres stultae Philosophiae: so doth Cyprian de
duplici martyrio; Si qui sic moriantur, aut infirmitis, aut
ambitio, aut dementia cogit eos; 'tis mere madness so to do,
furor est ne moriare mori. To this effect writes Arist. 3.
Ethic. Lipsius Manuduc. ad Stoicam Philosophiam lib. 3.
dissertat. 23. but it needs no confutation. This only let me
add, that in some cases, those hard censures of such as offer
violence to their own persons, or in some desperate fit to
others, which sometimes they do, by stabbing, slashing, &c.,
are to be mitigated, as in such as are mad, beside themselves
for the time, or found to have been long melancholy, and that
in extremity, they know not what they do, deprived of reason,
judgment, all, as a ship that is void of a pilot, must needs
impinge upon the next rock or sands, and suffer shipwreck.

P. Forestus hath a story of two melancholy brethren, that
made away themselves, and for so foul a fact, were
accordingly censured to be infamously buried, as in such
cases they use: to terrify others, as it did the Milesian
virgins of old, but upon farther examination of their misery
and madness, the censure was revoked, and they were solemnly
interred, as Saul was by David, 2 Sam. ii. 4. and Seneca well
adviseth, Irascere interfectori, sed miserere interfecti; be
justly offended with him as he was a murderer, but pity him
now as a dead man. Thus of their goods and bodies we can
dispose; but what shall become of their souls, God alone can
tell; his mercy may come inter pontem et fontem, inter
gladium et jugulum, betwixt the bridge and the brook, the
knife and the throat. Quod cuiquam contigit, cuivis potest:
Who knows how he may be tempted? It is his case, it may be
thine: Quae sua sors hodie est, cras fore vestra potest. We
ought not to be so rash and rigorous in our censures, as some
are; charity will judge and hope the best: God be merciful
unto us all.


GLOSSARY of obsolete words, or words used in an obsolete sense.

Abraham Man: A wandering beggar, originally a crippled or insane person supported by a monastery who was turned out at the Dissolution.
Adust: Dried up or thicker than normal
Apologue: An allegorical fable
Bangle Away: Fritter away, squander
Brach: A hound
Bradiopepsia: Slowness of digestion
Brownbastard: A sweet Spanish wine
Cachexia: A disease in which all the bodily parts are corrupt or deprived of nourishment
Cacochymia: Corruption of bodily humours
Cantharides: Spanish fly
Carcase: The framework of a building
Cardiaca: Heartburn or angina
Cark (N.): Anxiety, trouble
Carle (V.): To snarl or growl
Carpet Knight: A knight whose accomplishments are more in the boudoir than the battle-field
Cates: Dainty foods
Catoptrics: The optical science of reflection
Choler: Bile
Chuff (N): A boor
Chylus, Chilus: Digested food, as passed from the stomach to the gut
Cicuta: Hemlock
Circumforanean: Wandering, vagabond
Civilian: A lawyer specialising in civil cases
Clancular: Secret, underhand
Cock-Boat: A small rowing-boat
Cocker (V.): To indulge or pamper
Combust: (Of the moon or a planet) Invisible because near the sun in the sky
Compellations: Words addressed to someone
Concoction: Digestion of food; generation and development of the humours(q.v)
Constringed: Compressed or condensed
Constuprate: To rape
Contemn: To despise
Corographer: An author of an account of a particular country or district
Coulstaff: A pole used to carry heavy objects, which were slung from it, and the coulstaff supported on the shoulders of two men
Crudity: Imperfect concoction (q.v) of the humours (q.v.)
Cubbed Up: Cooped up
Cullion: A ballocks (in both senses)
Currier: A tanner or leather-dresser
Dehort: Dissuade
Deliquium: A fainting fit
Distemperature: A disordered condition or ailment of the body
Dummerer: A beggar who pretends to be dumb
Emmet: An ant
Empiric (N.): A quack doctor
Emulgent (Blood Vessels): The blood vessels of the kidneys
Flaggy: Flabby, limp
Fleer: To grimace
Fuliginous: Sooty
Fumados : Smoked pilchards
Funge: A soft-headed person
Fusled: Confused, muddled
Genethliacal: Astrological
Geniture: Horoscope
Gloze: To flatter, explain away, "spin"
Goosecap: A fool
Gripe (N.): A miser
Haberdine : Salt cod
Humour: One of the four fluids of the body governing health etc:  Blood, Bile, Phlegm, Black bile
Hypochondries: The upper abdomen, between the breast-bone and navel
Imbonity: Unkindness
Incondite: (of speech) Sudden cries without meaning, as "Oh!" "Ah!" "Grr!" etc.
Insuavity: Surliness
Intempestive: Inappropriate
Irrefragable: Undeniable
Jument: A beast of burden
Kell: A caul
Landleaper: A vagabond or fugitive
Lapithæ: A people of Thessaly
Livor: A bruise or similar discoloration of the skin; also, malice or spite
Luculent: Brilliant, shining
Malificated: Evil-intentioned
Mastupration: Masturbation
Mediately: Through an intermediary
Merry-Thought: A wishbone
Meseraical, Mesaraic: Of the mesentery, the membranes of the abdomen.
Metoposcopy: Telling a person's fortune or character by the appearance of his forehead, or face generally
Monomachy: Duel, single combat
Morphew: An ailment which causes scaling of the skin
Mouldwarp: A mole (the burrowing animal)
Myrache, Mirach: The abdomen, esp. the part around the stomach
Obnubilate: Cloud over
Oppilations: Obstructions
Oppugner: An adversary
Pairmain: A variety of apple
Parable (A.): Accessible, Easily obtained, 
Pasquil: A lampoon. It was the custom in Rome to affix lampoons to the statue of Pasquil on St. Mark's Day. 
Peckled: Spotted, speckled
Perstringe: To criticise or find fault.
Philosophastic: Of or relating to a philosophaster, a shallow or pseudo-philosopher
Pituita: Phlegm
Poke (Bavarian): Goitre
Polyanthean: (a.) Relating to an anthology; (n.) the compiler or user of one
Precipitium: A precipice
Purley: Purlieu, land around the edges of a forest
Quean: A slut or prostitute
Rumney: A sweet wine believed to be from Romania (actually Greece)
Scrub (N.): An insignificant or contemptible person
Semiustulation: Half-burning
Serves: The fruit of the service-tree (Sorbus)
Six Non-Natural Things: Diet; retention and evacuation; air; exercise; sleeping and waking; perturbations of the mind (See Part. 1 Sec. 2 Memb 1. Subsect 1.)
Spectrum: A ghost 
Stick Free: (A person) immune to injury by a weapon
Stramineous: Made of straw, worthless
Struma: Scrofula or goitre
Stum Rod: ?
Stupend: Extraordinary
Stut: Stutter
Suffite: A perfume burned or smoked as a medicinal remedy
Suffumigation: Perfuming a room with herbs etc. whose aroma is medicinal
Tetric: Bitter, morose
Theologastic: Of or relating to a theologaster, a shallow or pseudo-theologian
Trencher Chaplain: A chaplain who is one of a rich man's household servants
Tully: Cicero
Turgent: Swollen with pride
Typmany: A swelling or tumour
Vastity: Desolation
Venditate: To display for sale, or as if for sale
Venery: Sex or the pursuit of it; hunting in general
Wourts: Worts, i.e. plants, vegetables

