Bibliographic and Editorial Note.


     This version of the Works of "Aristotle, the Famous
Philosopher" is taken from a copy described on the title
page as "London: Published by the Booksellers", and on
the end-papers as "Printed and published by J. Coker &
Co., 208 Shoe Lane, London, E.C.4.". Vilely printed on
cheap wood-pulp paper, it is undated, but I would
estimate it between 1900 and 1925. Some of the
illustrations have been torn out. The "Family Physician"
which is a 19th-century addition, has been omitted.


Note on the recipes

     The edition has a great many misprints. As far as I
can I have corrected these, but in some cases, especially
in the many mixtures and potions, I have often been
unable to tell what the ingredient is supposed to be.
Senugreek is presumably fenugreek and sennel is fennel --
apparently the compositor was working from an edition
printed with long s's -- and quinceys are quinces. But
what are elephang, landant, melanchum, negalia, pilloch, 
and lots of others? They are not in the Oxford English
Dictionary. In these cases I have reproduced them as is.
I sincerely hope no one will be foolish enough to try to
make and use these remedies.


TITLE PAGE

THE WORKS
OF
ARISTOTLE,
THE FAMOUS PHILOSOPHER

Containing

I.  -- His Complete Masterpiece.
II. -- His Experienced Midwife.
III. -- His Book of Problems.
IV. -- His Remarks on Physiognomy.
V.  -- The Family Physician.

New and Improved Edition with Coloured Plates

LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY THE BOOKSELLERS


TO THE READER


     To say that ARISTOTLE, the learned author of the
following sheets, was reported to be the most learned
philosopher in the world, is no more than what every
intelligent person already knows; nor can any think
otherwise who will give themselves time to consider that
he was the scholar of Plato (the wisest philosopher of
his time) and under whom Aristotle profited so much, that
he was chosen by King Philip of Macedon as the most
worthy and proper person in his dominions to be tutor to
his son Alexander, by whose wise precepts and
instructions Alexander became master of so great wisdom,
judgment, powers, and magnanimity, that he justly
obtained the title of the Great. Alexander himself was so
sensible of the advantage he received from the
instructions of so great a Stagirite (for so Aristotle
was called from the country of Stagira, where he was
born) that he often declared he was more beholden to his
tutor, Aristotle, for the cultivation of his mind, than
to Philip, his father, for the kingdom of Macedon.

     Though Aristotle applied himself to the
investigations of the secrets of Nature, yet he was
pleased to bring into a fuller and more true light those
secrets with respect to the generation of man. This he
styled his MASTERPIECE; and in this he has made so
thorough a search, that he has as it were turned nature
inside out.

     The divine record assures us that the secrets of
Nature have been the study of divers illustrious persons
equally renowned for wisdom and goodness; the first of
whom, Job, has made it sufficiently evident by that
excellent philosophical account he gives of the
generation of man, in the tenth chapter of the book which
bears his name; where he says, "Thine hands hath made me,
and fashioned me together round about; Thou has poured me
out as milk, and curdled me like cheese; Thou hast
clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with
bones and sinews." David, one of the greatest kings of
israel, whose piety was superior to his power, being
peculiarly styled a man after God's own heart, says, in
his divine soliloquies to his Creator, "Thou hast covered
me in my mother's womb; I will praise Thee; for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made; Marvellous are Thy works,
and that my soul knoweth right well. My substance was not
hid from Thee when I was in secret, and curiously wrought
in the lowest parts of the earth; Thine eye did see my
substance, yet being imperfect; and in Thy book all my
members were written, which in continuance were
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them."

     Let the words of holy Job and those of David be put
together, and I will not scruple to affirm that they make
the most accurate system of philosophy respecting the
generation of man that has ever yet been penned;
therefore, why should not the mysteries of Nature be
inquired into without censure, since, from this inquiry,
so much praise resounds to the God of Nature? The more we
know of whose works the more our hearts will be inclined
to praise Him, as we see in the instance of David above
mentioned.

     That the knowledge of the secrets of Nature is too
often abused by many persons, I readily grant, and think
it very unfortunate that there should be a generation of
such profligate persons in the world; but at the same
time do aver that this is no objection to this work.

     Having said thus much of the wonderful works of
Nature in the generation of man, I shall next proceed to
give the reader the best Translation possible of that 
excellent Treatise of the renowned Aristotle, which he
was pleased to style his MASTERPIECE.

     I cannot help observing, that having met with a
collection of approved Recipes by the great Hippocrates,
and thinking they would be very acceptable to my readers,
I have added the same by way of Supplement, at the end of
the MASTERPIECE.


ARISTOTLE'S MASTERPIECE.

PART I. -- THE SECRETS OF NATURE DISPLAYED.

INTRODUCTION.

     IT is strange to see how things are slighted only
because they are common, though in themselves worthy of
the most serious consideration. This is the very case of
the subject I am now treating of. What is more common
than the begetting of children? And what is more
wonderful than the plastic power of Nature, by which
children are formed? For though there be radicated in the
very nature of all creatures a propension which leads
them to produce the image of themselves, yet how these
images are produced after those propensions are
satisfied, is only known to those who trace the secret
meanders of Nature in her private chambers, those dark
recesses of the womb where this embryo receives
formation. The original of which proceeds from the Divine
command -- increase and multiply. The natural inclination 
and propensity of both sexes to each other, with the
plastic power of Nature, is only the energy of the first
blessing, which to this day upholds the species of
mankind in the world.

     Now, Since philosophy informs us that Nosoe te ipsum
(know thyself) is one of the first lessons a man ought to
learn, it cannot surely be accounted an useless piece of
knowledge for a man to be acquainted with the cause of
his own being, or by what secret power of Nature it was,
that coagulated milk (as a divine author calls it) came
to be transubstantiated into a human body. The
explanation of this mystery, and the unfolding of the
plastic power of Nature in the secret workings of
generation and the formation of the seed in the womb, are
the subject of the following Treatise; a subject so
necessary to be known to the female sex, that many for
want of this knowledge have perished with the fruit of
their womb also; who, had they but understood the secrets
of generation which are displayed in this Treatise, might
have been still living. For the sake of such, I have
compiled this work, which I have divided into two parts,
in the following manner:

     1st,-- I will show that Nature need not be ashamed
of her work; give a particular description of the parts
or organs of generation in man, and afterwards in woman;
and then show the use of these parts in the act of
coition; and how positively Nature has adapted them to
the end for which He has ordained them.

     2nd,-- I will point out the prohibition of
restriction, that the Creator of all things and the Lord
of Nature has put upon man, by the institution of
marriage; with the advantage it brings to mankind.

     3rd.-- I shall show when either sex may enter Into a
married state, and be fit to answer the end of their
creation, etc.

     4th.-- I shall discourse on virginity, and therein
show what it is, how it is known, by what means it may be
lost, how a person may know that it is so, etc.

     In the second part, which chiefly relates to married
women, and the preservation of the Fruit of the Womb, for
the propagation of mankind to the world, I will show:

     1st.-- What conception is: what is pre-requisite
thereunto; how a woman may know when she hath conceived,
and whether a boy or a girl.

     2nd.-- Show how a woman that has conceived ought to
order herself.

     3rd.-- Show what woman ought to do that is near the
time of her delivery, and how she ought to be assisted.

     4th.-- I shall show what are the obstructions of
conception, and therein discourse largely about
barrenness, and show what are the causes and cure thereof
both in men and women.

     5th.-- Direct midwives how they shall assist women
in the time of lying in; bringing several other material
matters proper to be spoken of under each of these
several heads; which shall sufficiently render this book
what Aristotle designed it, his Complete Master Piece.


CHAPTER I.

A PARTICULAR DESCRIPTION OF THE PARTS AND INSTRUMENTS OF
GENERATION, BOTH IN MEN AND WOMEN.

Sec. I.-- Of the Instruments of Generation in Men, with
particular Description thereof.

THOUGH the Instruments, or parts of generation in all
creatures, with respect to their outward form, are not
perhaps the more comely, yet in compensation of that,
Nature has put upon them a more abundant and far greater
honour than on other parts, in ordaining them to be the
means by which every Species of Being is continued from
one generation to another. And, therefore, though a man
or woman were, through the bounty of Nature, endowed with
angelic countenances, and the most exact symmetry and
proportion of parts that concurred together, to the
making up of the most perfect beauty, yet, if they were
defective in the instruments of generation, they would
not for all their beauty be acceptable to either of the
other sex; because they would be thereby rendered
incapable of satisfying the natural propensions which
every one finds in himself. And therefore since it is our
duty to be acquainted with ourselves, and to search out
the wonders of God in nature, I need not make any apology
for anatomising the secret parts of generation.

     The organ of generation in man, Nature has placed
obvious to the sight, and is called the Yard; and because
hanging without the belly, is called the Penis, a
pendendo. It is in form long, round, and on the upper
side flattish, and consists of skins, tendons, veins,
arteries, and sinews, being seated under the Ossa Pubis,
and ordained by Nature for a twofold work viz., for the
evacuation of urine and conveying the seed into the
Matrix. The urine which it evacuates is brought to it
through the neck of the Versica Urinariæ; and the seed
which it conveys into the Matrix is brought into it from
the Visiculæ Seminales. But to be more particular.

     Besides the common parts, as the cuticle, the skin,
and the Membrana Carnosa, it has several internal parts
proper to it, of which number there are seven, viz.,

     The two nervous bodies; the Septum; the Urethra; the
Glands; the Muscles; and the Vessels; of each of these
distinctly, in the order I have placed them; and first,
of

     The two nervous Bodies. These are called so from
their being surrounded with a thick, white, nervous
membrane, though their inward substance is spongy, as
consisting principally of veins, arteries, and nervous
fibres, interwoven like a net. And nature has so ordered
it, that when the nerves are filled with animal spirits,
then the yard is distended and becomes erect; when flux
of the spirit ceases, then the blood and the remaining
spirits are absorbed or sucked up by the veins, and so
the Penis becomes limber and flaggy.

     2. The second internal part is the Septum Lucidum,
and this is in substance white and nervous, or sinewy,
and its office is to uphold the two lateral or side
ligaments and the Urethra.

     3. The third is the Urethra, which is only the
channel by which both the seed and the urine are conveyed
out; it is in substance soft and loose, thick and sinewy,
like that of the side ligaments. It begins at the neck of
the bladder, but springs not from thence, only is joined
to it, and so proceeds to the glands. It has three holes
at the beginning, the largest whereof is in the midst,
which receives the urine into it. The other two are
smaller, receiving the seed from each seminal vessel.

     4.-- The fourth is the Glands, which is at the end
of the Penis, covered with a very thin membrane, by
reason of a Præputium or Foreskin, which in some cover
the top of the yard quite close, in others not; and by it
moving up and down in the act of copulation brings
pleasure both to the man and woman. The extreme part of
the cover, which I call Præputium, and which is so called
a præputando, from cutting off, as the Jews were
commanded to cut it off on the eighth day. The ligament,
by which it is fastened to the glands, is called Frænum,
or the Bridle.

     5.-- The fifth thing is the Muscles, and these are
four in number, two being placed on each side. These
muscles (which are instruments of voluntary motion, and
without which no part of the body can move itself)
consists of fibrous flesh to make up their body; of
Nerves for the sense; of Veins for their vital heat; and
of a membrane or skin to knit them together, and to
distinguish one muscle from the other, and all of them
from the flesh. I have already said there are two of them
on each side; and I will now add, that one on each side
is shorter and thicker and that their use is to erect the
yard, from whence they have obtained the name of
Erectors. And having told you that two of them are
thicker and shorter than the other, I need not tell you
that the other two are longer and thinner; only I take
notice that the office of the two last is to dilate, or
(if you will) open the lower parts of the Urethra, both
for making water and voiding the seed, and therefore are
called Acceleratores.

     6.-- The sixth and last things are the Vessels,
which consist of Veins, Nerves, and Arteries; of which
some pass by the skin, and are visible to the eye, and
others pass more inwardly. For indeed the arteries are
dispersed through the body of the yard much more than the
veins, and the dispersion is contrariwise, the right
artery being dispersed to the left side, and the left to
the right; as for the two nerves, the greater is bestowed
upon the muscles and the body of the yard, and the least
upon the skin.

     What I have hitherto said relates to the yard,
properly so called; but because there are some Appendices
belonging thereto, which, when wanted, render the yard of
no use in the act of generation, it will also be
necessary before I conclude this section, to say
something of them -- I mean the stones, or testicles, so
called, because they testify the person to be a man;
their number and place is obvious; and as to their use,
in them the blood brought thither by the spermatic
arteries is elaborated into seed. They have coats or
coverings of two sorts, proper and common; the common are
two, and invest both the testes; the outer-most of the
common coats, consist of the Cuticula, or true skin,
called Scrotum, hanging out of the abdomen, like a purse;
the Membrana Carnosa is the innermost. The proper coats
are also two; the outer called Elithroidis or Vaginalis,
the inner Albugien; into the outer are inserted the
cremasters; to the upper part of the testes are fixed the
Epididymides, or Parastatæ, from whence arise the Vasa
Deferentia, or Ejaculatoria; which, when they approach
near the neck of the bladder, deposit the seed into the
Vesiculæ Seminales, which are each, or two or three of
them, like a bunch of grapes, and emit the seed into the
Urethra, in the act of copulation. Near those are the
Prostatæ, which are about the bigness of a walnut, and
join to the neck of the bladder. These afford an oily,
slippery and salt humour, to besmear the Urethra, and
thereby defend it from the acrimony of the seed and
urine. Besides these vessels, by which the blood is
conveyed to the testes, or of which the seed is made, and
the arteries spermaticæ, there are also two; and so
likewise are the veins which carry out the remaining
blood, which are called venæ spermaticæ.

And thus man's nobler parts we see,
For such the parts of generation be;
And they that carefully survey will find
Each part is fitted for the use design'd
The purest blood, we find, if well we heed,
is in the testicles turn'd into seed.
Which by most proper channels is transmitted
Into the place by Nature for it fitted;
With highest sense of pleasure to excite
In amorous combatants the more delight.
For Nature does in this work design
Profit and pleasure in one act to join.

SEC. II.-- Of the secret Parts in Woman.

     WOMAN, next to man, the noblest piece of this
creation, is bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh, a
sort of second self; and in a married state are accounted
but one; As the poet says,

Man and wife are but one right
Canonical hermaphrodite.


     It is therefore the secret parts of that curious
piece of Nature that we are to lay open, which we will do
with as much modesty as will consist with speaking
intelligibly.

     The external parts, commonly called Pudenda (from
the shamefacedness that is in women to have them seen)
are the lips of the great orifice, which are visible to
the eye; and in those that are grown, are covered with
hair, and have pretty store of spongy fat; their use
being to keep the internal part from all annoyance by
outward accidents.

     Within these are the nymphae, or wings, which
present themselves to the eye when the lips are severed,
and consist of soft and spongy flesh, and the doubling of
the skin placed at the sides of the neck; they compass
the clitoris, and both in form and colour resemble the
comb of a cock, looking fresh and red, and in the act of
coition receive the penis or yard between them; besides
which they give passage both to the birth and urine. The
use of the wings and knobs like myrtle berries, shutting
the orifice and neck of the bladder, and by the swelling
up, cause titulation and delight in those parts, and also
to obstruct the involuntary passage of the urine.

     The next thing is the clitoris, which is a sinewy
and hard part of the womb, replete with spongy and black
matter within, in the same manner as the side ligaments
of the yard; and indeed resembles it in form, suffers
erection and falling in the same manner, and both stirs
up lust, and gives delight in copulation; for without
this, the fair sex neither desire nuptial embraces, nor
have pleasure in them, nor conceive by them; and
according to the greatness or smallness of this part,
they are more or less fond of men's embraces; so that it
may properly be styled the seat of lust.

Blowing the coals of these amorous fires,
Which youth and beauty to be quench'd requires.

And it may well be styled so; for it is like a yard in
situation, substance, composition, and creation, growing
sometimes out of the body two inches, but that happens
not but upon some extraordinary accident. It consists, as
I have said, of two spongy and skinny bodies, which being
a distinct original from the Os Pubis, the head of it
being covered with a tender skin, having a hole like the
yard of a man, but not through, in which, and the bigness
of it, it only differs.

     The next thing is the passage of the urine, which is
under the clitoris, and above the neck of the womb, so
that the urine of a woman comes not through the neck of
the womb, neither is the passage common as in men, but
particular, and by itself. This passage opens itself into
the fissures to evacuate the urine; for the securing of
which from cold, or any other inconveniency, there is one
of the four carbuncles, or fleshy knobs, placed before
it, which shuts up the passage. For these knobs, which
are four in number, and in resemblance like myrtle
berries, are placed behind the wings before spoken of,
quadrangularly, one against the other. These are round in
virgins, but hang flagging when virginity is lost. 'Tis
the uppermost of these that Nature has placed for
securing the urinary passage from cold, and which is 
therefore largest and forked for that end.

     The lips of the womb that next appear cover the neck
thereof, but being separated disclose it; and then two
things are to be observed and these are the neck itself,
and the hymen, more properly called the claustrum
virginale, which I shall treat more it large when I come
to shew what virginity is. The neck of the womb I call
the channel, is between the fore-mentioned knobs and the
Inner bone of the womb, which receives the man's yard
like a sheath; and that it may be dilated with the more
ease and pleasure in the act of coition, it is sinewy and
a little spongy; there being in this concavity divers
folds or orbicular plaits made by tunicles, which are
wrinkled, it forms an expanded rose that may be seen in
virgins; but in those that have used copulation, it comes
by degrees to be extinguished; so that the inner side of
the neck of the womb appears smooth, and in old women if
becomes more hard and grisly. But though this channel be 
sinking down, wreathed, and crooked, yet is otherwise in
the time of copulation: as also when women are under the
monthly purgation, or in labour, being then very much
extended, which is a great cause of their pains.

     The Claustrum Virginale, commonly called the Hymen,
is that which closes the neck of the womb; for between
the duplicity of the two tunicles which constitute the
neck of the womb, there are many veins and arteries
running along that arise from the vessels of both sides
of the thighs, and so pass into the neck of the womb,
being very large; and the reason thereof is, because the
neck of the womb requires to be filled with abundance of
spirits to be dilated thereby, that it may the better
take hold of the Penis, such motions requiring great
heat, which being more intense by the act of friction,
consumes a great deal of moisture, in the supplying
whereof large vessels are very necessary; hence it is
that the neck of the womb of women of reasonable stature
is eight inches in length. But there is also another
cause of the largeness of these vessels, because their
monthly purgations make their way through them; and, for
this reason, women, though with child, often continue
them, for though the womb be shut up, yet the passage in
the neck of the womb, through which these vessels pass,
is open. And, therefore, as soon as you penetrate the
pudendum, there may be seen two Little pits or holes, and
in which are contained an humour, which by being pressed
out in the time of coition, does greatly delight the fair
sex.

      I shall in the next place, proceed to a description
of the womb, which is the field of generation, without
which nothing can be done. The parts we have been
speaking of being ordained by Nature to convey the seed
to the womb, which being impregnated therewith by virtue
of the plastic power of Nature, produces its Own
likeness.

     The womb is situated in lower parts of the
hypogastrion, being joined to its neck, and is placed
between the bladder and the
Strait gut, so that it is kept from swaying or rolling;
yet hath its liberty to stretch and dilate itself, and
also to contract itself, according as Nature in that case
disposes it. It is of a round figure, somewhat like a
gourd; lessening and growing more acute towards one end,
being knit together by its proper ligaments, and its neck
joined by its own substance, and certain membranes that
fasten it to the Os Sacrum, and the share-bone. it is
very different with respect to its largeness in women
especially between such as have had children and those
that have none. It is so thick in substance that it
exceeds a thumb's breadth; and after conception, augments
to a greater proportion, and to strengthen it yet more,
it is interwoven with fibres overthwart, both straight
and winding; and its proper vessels are veins, arteries,
and nerves, amongst which there are two little veins
which pass from the spermatic vessels to the bottom of
the womb, and two bigger from the hypogastrics, touching
both the bottom and neck, the mouth of these veins
piercing so far as the inward cavity.

     The womb, besides what I have already mentioned,
hath two arteries on both sides the spermatic vessels and
the hypogastrics which still accompany the veins with
sundry little nerves knit and interwoven in the form of a
net, which are also extended throughout even from the
bottom to the pudenda themselves, sympathetically moving
from the head and womb.

     Here the reader ought to observe, that two ligaments
hanging on either side of the womb from the share-bone,
piercing through the Peritonæum, and joining to the bone
itself causes the womb to be movable, which upon divers
occasions either falls low or rises; the neck of the womb
is of a most exquisite sense, so that if it be at any
time disordered, either with a schirrosity, too much hot
moisture, or relaxation, the womb is made subject to
barrenness. In those that are near their delivery, there
usually stays a most glutinous matter in the entrance, to
facilitate the birth; for at that time the mouth of the
womb is opened to such a wideness, as is in proportion to
the largeness of the child.

     Under the parts belonging to generation in women, 
are also comprehended the preparatory or spermatic
vessels; the preparatory vessels differ not in number
from those in man, for they are likewise four, two
vessels and two arteries; their rise and original is the
same as in man, and the side of them are two arteries
which grow from them, differing only in their size and
manner of insertion: the right vein issuing from the
trunk of the hollow vein, and the left from the emulgent
vein; and on the side of them are two arteries which grow
from the arcuta. These preparatory vessels are shorter in
women than in men, because they have a shorter passage,
and the stones of a woman lying in the belly, but those
of a man without; but to make amends for their shortness,
they have far more writhings to and fro, in and out, than
they have in men, that so the substance they carry may be
better prepared; neither are they united as they are in
men, before they come to the stones, but are divided into
two branches, whereof the greater only passeth to the
stones, but the lesser to the fæcundated egg, and this is
properly called conception. And then, secondly, to
cherish it, and nourish it, till Nature has framed the
child, and brought it to perfection. Thirdly, it strongly
operates in sending forth the birth, when its appointed
time is accomplished, there dilating itself in an
extraordinary manner; and so aptly re moved from the
senses that no injury accrues to it from thence,
retaining in itself a strength and power to operate and
cast forth the birth.

     The use of the preparatory vessels is to convey the
blood to the testicles, of which a part is spent in the
nourishment of them, and the production of those little
bladders in all things resembling eggs, through which the
Vassa Preparentia run, and are obliterated In them. This
conveyance of blood is by the arteries, but as for the
veins, their office is to bring back what blood remains
from the fore-mentioned use.

     The vessels of this kind are much shorter in women
than men, by reason of the nearness to the testicles; and
yet that defect is more than made good by the many
intricate windings to which they are subject; for in the
middle way they divide themselves into branches of
different magnitude; for one of them being bigger than
the other, passes to the testicles.

     The testicles in women are very useful; for where
they are defective generation work is quite spoiled; for
though those little bladders which are on their outward
superfices contain nothing of the seed, as the followers
of Galen, etc., erroneously imagine, yet they contain
several eggs (about the number of 20 in each testicle)
one of which, being impregnated by the most spirituous
part of the man's seed in the act of coition descends
through the oviducts into the womb, where it is cherished
till it becomes a live child. The figure of these Ovæ or
eggs is not altogether round, but a little flat and
depressed on the sides, and in their lower part oval; but
where the blood vessels enter them, that is, in the upper
part, they are more plain, having but one membrane about
them, that the heat may have more access to the womb,
both to the nourishment of itself and of the infant
therein. Let me further add, these spermatic veins
receive the arteries as they pass by the side of the
womb, and thereby make a mixture of the vital and natural
blood, that their work may be more perfect. The
deferentia, or carrying vessels, spring from the lower
part of the stones, and are in colour white, substance
sinewy and pass not to the womb straight, but wreathed;
they proceed from the womb in two parts, resembling
horns, whence they are called the horns of the womb.

     The stones of women are another part belonging to
the instruments of generation: for such things they also
have as well as man, but they are also indifferently
placed; neither is their bigness, temperament, substance,
form nor covering the same. As to their place, it is the
hollowness of the abdomen, resting upon the muscles of
the loins, and so not pendulous, as in man. And that they
are so placed is, that by contracting the heat, they may
be the more fruitful, their office being to contain the
ovum, or egg, which being impregnated by the seed of the
man, is that from which the embryo is engendered. These
stones differ also from men's in their form: for, though
they are smooth in men they are uneven in women; being
also depressed or flattish in them, though in men their
form is more round and oval. They have also in women but
one skin, whereas in men they have four; Nature having
wisely contrived to fortify these most against the
injuries of the air, that are most exposed to it; the
stones of women being within, but those of men without
the belly. They differ also in their substance, being
much more soft than those of men, and not so well
compacted; their bigness and temperature differ, in that
they are less and colder than those of men. Some indeed
will have their use to be the same as in men, but that is
for want of judgment; for Aristotle and Scotus both
affirm that this women have no seed, and that their
stones differ also in their use from those of men; their
use being, as I have already said, to contain the egg
which is to be impregnated by the seed of man.

     It now only remains that I say something of the
ejaculatory vessels, which have two obscure passages, one
on either side, which in substance differ nothing from
the spermatic veins. They rise in one part from the
bottom of the womb, but not reaching from the other
extremity either to the stones nor any other part, are
shut up, and incapable, adhering to the womb, as the
colon doth to the blind gut, and winding half way about;
though the stones are remote from them, and touch them
not, yet they are tied to them by certain membranes
resembling the wings of a bat, through which certain
veins and arteries passing from the end of the stones,
may be said here to have their passages proceeding from
the corners of the womb to the testicles, and are
accounted the proper ligaments by which the testicles and
womb are united and strongly knit together.

Thus the woman's secrets I have survey'd
And let them see how curiously they're made.
And that, though they of different sexes be,
Yet in the whole they are the same as we.
For those that have the strictest searchers been,
Find women are but men turn'd outside in:
And men, if they but cast their eyes about,
May find they're women with their inside out.


     SECT. III.-- Of the use and action of the several
Parts in Women appropriated to Generation.

     I SHALL next take a survey of the parts of
generation both in men and women, and show the use of
action of those parts in the work of generation, which
will excellently inform us that Nature has made nothing
in vain.

     The external parts in women's privities, or that
which is most obvious to the eye at first, commonly
called Pudendum, are designed by Nature to cover the
great orifice; Nature intending that orifice to receive
the penis or yard in the act of coition, and also to give
passage to the urine; and, at the time of birth, to the
child. The use of the wings or knobs, like myrtle-berries
are for the security of the internal part, by shutting up
the orifice and neck of the bladder, also for delight and
pleasure; for, by their swelling up, they cause
titulation and delight in those parts, being pressed by
the man's yard. Their use is likewise to obstruct the
involuntary passage of the urine.

     The use and action of the clitoris in women, is like
that of the penis or yard in men, that is erection; its
extreme end being like that of the glands in the man, the
seat of the greatest pleasure of the act of copulation,
so is this the clitoris in women, and therefore called
the sweetness of love, and the fury of venery.

     The action and use of the neck of the womb is the
same with that of the penis, that is, erection, which is
occasioned sundry ways; for, First, in copulation it is
erected and made straight from the passage of the penis
to the womb. Secondly, whilst the passage is replete with
spirits and vital blood, it becomes more straight for
embracing the penis. And, for the necessity of erection
there is a two-fold reason: one is, that if the neck of
the womb was not erected, the yard would have no
convenient passage to the womb. The other is, that it
hinders any hurt or damage that might ensue through the
violent concussion of the yard, during the time of
copulation.

     Then, as to the vessels that pass through the neck
of the womb, their office is to replenish it with blood
and spirits, that so as the moisture consumes through the
heat contracted in copulation, it may still by these
vessels be renewed. But their chief business is to convey
nutriment to the womb.

Thus Nature nothing does in vain produce,
But fits each part for what's its proper use;
And though of different sexes formed we be,
Yet betwixt these there is that unity,
That we in nothing can a greater find,
Unless the soul that's to the body joined:
And sure in this Dame Nature's in the right,
The strictest union yields the most delight.


CHAPTER II.

OF THE RESTRICTION LAID UPON MEN IN THE USE OF CARNAL
COPULATION, BY THE INSTITUTION OF MARRIAGE, WITH THE
ADVANTAGE THAT IT BRINGS TO MANKIND, AND THE PROPER TIME
FOR IT.


     Though the great architect of the world has been
pleased to frame us different sexes, and, for the 
propagation and continuation of mankind, has indulged us
the mutual embraces of each other, the desire whereof, by
a powerful and secret instinct, is become natural to us,
yet he would leave them to the law of the Creator, who
has ordained that every man shall have his own wife; and
though since man, by sinning against his Creator hath
fallen from his primitive purity and has multiplied wives
and concubines by which the first institution is
violated, and the greatest affront done the divine law-
giver: for the holy Jesus has told us, That in the
beginning is was so; the marriage of one man to one
woman: so that, as these conjugal delights cannot be
enjoyed but in a married state, so neither, in that
state, can they lawfully be participated of with more
than one wife. And it is the breaking of this order that
has filled the world with confusion and debauchery, has
brought diseases on the body, consumptions on estates,
and eternal ruin to the soul, if not repented of. Let all 
those, therefore, of either sex, that have a desire to
enjoy the delights of mutual embraces take care that they
do it in a married state, with their own wives or
husbands, or else it will become a curse to them instead
of a blessing. And, to that end, let them consider what
is due to the transgressors of his law, who hath said,
"Thou shalt not commit adultery." Whatever is spoken of
the venereal pleasures, is spoken to those who have, or
may have, a right thereunto, by being in a married state.
For,

Who to forbidden pleasures are inclin'd
Will find at last they leave a sting behind.


     SECT. II.-- Of the Happiness of the Married States

MATRIMONY, in the present age, is looked upon as a most
insupportable yoke:-- Wives and husbands are accounted
the greatest clogs and burdens to those who give up the
reins to their unbridled appetites. Notwithstanding the
present mode of thinking is against me, I doubt not of
making it appear, that a married state is a most happy
condition (when persons are equally yoked) that is to be
enjoyed on this side of heaven.

     The Author and institutor of marriage, and that
first brought man and woman together, was no other than
he that made them: even the great Lord of the Universe,
whose wisdom being infinite, could not but know what
condition was good for us; and his goodness being equal
to his wisdom, sufficiently shows the end of this
institution was the happiness of the creature he had
made: and indeed man could not be happy without it: for
he saw that it was not good for man should be alone, and
therefore made a woman to complete his happiness, which
was not perfect, whilst he wanted such a help-mate for
him.

     The time of the institution is also very remarkable;
for it was whilst Adam and his new-made bride were
clothed with all that virgin purity and innocence with
which they were created, before they had entertained the
least converse with the tempter, or had given way to one
disordered thought; and yet could curiously survey the
several incomparable beauties and perfections of each
other without sin, and knew not what it was to lust. It
was at this time that the Creator united Adam in the holy
bonds of wedlock.

     'Twas in paradise where the first match was made;
and which could have scarcely been paradise without it;
for paradise is known to be a place of pleasure, wherein
they were surrounded with the quintessence of all
delights; where there was nothing wanting that might
please the eye, charm the ear, or gratify the taste; and
yet Adam was not happy with all these pleasing sweets
till he enjoyed his Eve; so that it was a married state
which completed his happiness, and which was a paradise
of paradise itself.

     What an addition to happiness a good wife makes!
Such an one is the best companion in prosperity, and in
adversity the surest friend; the greatest assistance in
business, the only lawful and comfortable means by which
she can have issue, and the great remedy against
incontinence; and if we believe King Solomon, the
greatest honour unto him that has her. For he it is that
tells us, She is a crown to her husband. Surely these are
not small advantages!

     If married persons would be careful to do their
respective duties there would be but little complaining;
nor would any condition in life be so agreeable as the
married state. How much more satisfaction a man receives
in the embraces of a loving wife, than in the wanton
dalliances of a deceitful harlot.

Thus does this section unto all relate,
The pleasures that attend the married state
And shews it does with innocence consist,
And that so many have those pleasures miss'd,
It's their own fault they will no wiser be,
As in this mirror they may plainly see.


     SECT. III.-- Showing at what age young men and
virgins are capable of carnal copulation; and why they so
much desire it.

      I SHALL in this present section make it my business
to show at what age young men and virgins are capable of
the marriage bed, which, because so many desire before
they attend to it, it will be likewise necessary to show
the causes of their impetuous desires.

     The inclinations of virgins to marriage is to be
known by many symptoms; for when they arrive to ripe age,
which is about fourteen or fifteen, their natural
purgations begin to flow; and then the blood, which no
longer serves for the increase of their bodies, does, by
its abounding, stir up their minds to venery: to which
also external causes may incite them. For their spirits
are brisk and inflamed when they arrive at this age, and
their bodies are often more heated by their eating sharp
and salt things; and by spices, by which their desire of
venereal embraces becomes very great, and at some
critical junctures very insupportable. The use of those
so much desired enjoyments being denied to virgins, is
often followed by very dangerous, and sometimes dismal
consequences, precipitating them into those follies that
may bring an indelible stain on their families, or bring
on themselves the Green Sickness, or other diseases. But
when they are married, and those desires satisfied by
their husband, these distempers vanish, and their beauty
returns more gay and lively than before. And this strong
inclination of theirs may be known by their eager gazing
at men, and affecting their company, which sufficiently
demonstrates that Nature excites them to desire coition.
Nor is this the case with virgins only, but the same may
be observed in young widows who cannot be satisfied
without that due benevolence which they were wont to
receive from their husbands.

     At fourteen years of age, commonly, the menses begin
to flow in virgins; at which time they are capable of
conceiving, and therefore fit for marriage; though it
would be much better, both for themselves and their
children, if they would not marry till eighteen or
twenty; if they are healthy, of a strong body, and use
themselves to temperance, they may continue bearing till
upwards of 50, though generally they leave off bearing
between 40 and 50: for the menses flow a longer time in
some cases than others; but when they cease, they cease
bearing. And therefore Sarah bearing isaac after it had
ceased to be with her according to the custom of women,
may be well termed miraculous.

     As for male youth, when they arrive at i6, or
between that and 17, having much vital strength, they may
be capable of getting  children; which ability, by the
force and heat of procreating matter, constantly
increases till 45, 56, and 65, and then begins to flag,
the seed by degrees becoming unfruitful, the natural
spirits being extinguished, and the heat dried up. Thus
it is with them for the most part, but many times it
falls out otherwise in particular instances: as once in
Sweedland a man was married at 100 years old to a bride
of 30, and had many children by her; but he was a man of
so good a constitution, and carried his age so well, that
strangers would not have guessed him at above 60. And in
Campania, where the air is clear and temperate, it is
usual for men of 80 years old to marry young virgins, and
have children by them: which shows that age in men
hinders not procreation, unless they be exhausted in
their youth, and their yards shrivelled up.

     If any ask, why a woman is sooner barren than a man?
let such know that the natural heat which is the cause of
generation, is more predominate in men than women; for
the monthly purgations of women show them to be more
moist than men, and so does also the softness of their
bodies. And the man exceeding her in native heat,
concocts the humours into proper aliment, by the benefit
whereof they are elaborated into seed: but women, though
of a finer make, yet not being so strong as men, their
faculties are thereby hindered in their operation.

Thus Nature to her children is so kind,
That early they those inclinations find,
Which prompts them on to propagate mankind.
Hence 'tis a virgin her desires can't smother,
But restless is till she be made a mother.


CHAPTER III.

OF VIRGINITY; WHAT IT IS; HOW IT MAY BE KNOWN; BY WHAT
MEANS IT MAY BE LOST; AND HOW A PERSON MAY KNOW THAT IT
IS SO.

SEC. I. Of Virginity, and wherein it consists.

     HAVING treated of the desire young men and virgins
have to mutual embraces, and at what age they are fit for
them; I have also shown that these pleasures are only
lawful to be enjoyed in a married state; and have also
acquainted my readers with the advantage of such a
condition. But since the desires of many after mutual
embraces are so impetuous, that not having an opportunity
to enter into a married state, they have anticipated the
pleasures of matrimony, and have lost their virginity
beforehand: and yet, perhaps, have afterwards pretended
to bring their virginity to a marriage bed, by which
means many an honest man has been deceived, and
meretricious women escaped with impunity; and, on the
other hand, some virtuous young virgins, that have indeed
come such unto their husband's beds, have been accused by
the  ignorance and incredulity of their husbands to have
lost their virginity beforehand, when there has been no
such matter, therefore, to do right in this case to both
parties, my design in this chapter is to show what
virginity is, and wherein it consists; how many ways it
may be lost; and how a man may know whether it be lost or
not; that so women may not be wrongfully censured, or men
imposed upon.

     Virginity, untouched and taintless, is the boast and
pride of the fair sex; but they generally commend it to
put it off. For, as good as it is, they care not how soon
they are honestly rid of it. And I think they are in the
right of it, for if kept it grows useless, or at least,
loses so much of its value; a stale virgin (if such a
thing there be) being looked upon like an old Almanack,
out of date.-- But to speak to the purpose, virginity is
the chief, the best, the prime of any thing, and is
properly the integrity of a woman's privities, not
violated by man, or not known by him; it being the
distinguishing characteristic of a virgin that she has
not known man.
     To make this more plain, I must here
observe, that there is in  maids, in the neck of the
womb, a membranous production called the Hymen, which is
like the bud of a rose half blown, and this is broken in
the first act of copulation with man; and hence came the
word Defloro, to deflower; when the taking of virginity
is called the deflowering of a virgin; for when the rose
bud is expanded, virginity is lost. Certain it is, there
is in the first act of copulation something that causes
pain and bleedings, which is an evident sign of
virginity. But what this is, authors are not agreed on.
Some say it is a nervous membrane, or thin skin with
small veins, that bleed at the first penetration of the
yard. Others say it is the four carbuncles, knobs, or
little buds like myrtle berries, which are plump and full
in virgins, but hang loose or flaggy in those that have
used copulation, being pressed by the yard. Some have
observed a fleshy circle about the Nymphae, or neck of
the womb, with little obscure veins, which make the
membrane not to be nervous, but fleshy. But setting aside
conjectures, the Hymen, or Claustrum Virginale is a thin
membrane interwoven with fleshy fibres, and endowed with
many little arteries and veins spread across the passage
of the vagina, behind the insertion of the bladder, with
a hole in the midst for the menses to flow, so big that
it will admit of the top  of one's little finger. This is
that which is called the Zone, or girdle of chastity:
and, where it is found in the form described, it is a
certain note of virginity; but, in the first act of
copulation, it is generally accompanied with an effusion
of blood, which blood is called the flower of virginity;
and, when once it is broken, is never closes again.

SEC. II. How Virginity may be lost, etc.

     IN the former section, I have endeavoured to show in
what virginity consists, and that it is lost by the first
penetration of the yard, which may be easily known by its
being attended with, an effusion of blood upon the
rupture of the Hymenean membrane, or Claustrum Virginale;
but I must do the fair sex this justice to let the world
know, that although wherever this is found, it be an
undoubted token of virginity, yet it will not follow that
where this token is wanting, virginity is deflowered and
lost; for the Hymen may be corroded by acrimonious and
fretting humours flowing through it with the Menses, or
it may be violated by the inversion or falling out of the
Uterus, or of the Vagina or sheath, which sometimes
happens even to virgins; or (which I would have all
Virgins to beware of, for the preservation of their
credit, and preventing of all causes of suspicion)
perhaps the indiscreet or unwary bride had her Menses but
a day or two before, in which case both the Hymen and the
inner wrinkled membranes of the Vagina are flaggy, weak,
and relaxed, so that no such rupture, and of consequence,
no such effusion, may happen. It were better, therefore,
upon this account, that when virgins are about to marry
they would fix their wedding at least six or seven days
after the Menses have done flowing.

     But further, to some Nature hath given greater
desires after enjoyment than to others, and to such,
though they abstain from enjoyment, yet so great is their
lust and desire after it, that they may break the Hymen
or Claustrum Virginale: and sometimes it itches to that
degree that they put in their finger, and so break it.
Sometimes the midwives break it in the birth; and
sometimes it is done by the stoppage of the urine,
coughing, violent straining, or sneezing; so that, if
there be no bleeding at the first penetration of the
husband, it is not always a sign of unchastity, or that
another has been there before him, seeing that the
Hymenean membranes may be broken so many ways; but where
bleeding does follow, it is evident and undeniable token
that the person was a virgin, and had never known man
before. And indeed, though the Hymen (or membrane so-
called) may be broken, all these ways I have mentioned,
yet it so rarely happens to be broken any other way, that
Leo Africanus makes mention of it as a general custom of
the Africans at their weddings, that, after the ceremony
is over, the bride and bridegroom are shut up in a
chamber, while the wedding dinner is preparing: an
ancient woman stands at the door to receive from the
bridegroom a sheet,  having the bloody tokens of the
wife's virginity, which she shows in triumph to all the
guests, and then they feast with joy: but if there is no
blood seen, the bride is sent home again to her friends
with disgrace, and the disappointed guests go home
without their dinner.

     There are others that make the straightness of the
privities a sign of virginity, but this is a very
uncertain rule; for this depends much upon the age, habit
of body, and other circumstances. But, though indeed it
must be granted that women who have used carnal
copulation, are not so straight as virgins, yet this
cannot be a certain argument of virginity, because, after
often repeated acts of venery, the privities may be made
so straight by the use of astringent medicines, that
those who trust to this sign may sometimes take a whore
instead of a virgin. And I have heard of a courtesan,
who, though she had been married, gave herself out to be
a virgin, and, by the help of a bath of comfrey roots
deceived those with whom she had to do.

     Others take upon them to be judges of lost virginity
by milk in the breast; but such, perhaps, are ignorant
that there is a two-fold milk; the one of virgins, the
other of such as have conceived or brought forth
children: that of virgins is a malady contrary to nature,
but the other is natural. The first is made of blood from
the womb, and so goes to the breasts, being nothing but
superfluous nourishment that is turned into milk by the
faculty of the breasts, without the knowledge of man: the
other is only where there is a child either in the womb
or born. Yet the milk differs very much, both in respect
to the blood, and diversity of veins that brings it to
the breasts; and though both are white, yet that of
virgins is thinner, and less in quantity, neither is it
so sweet. Therefore, if virgins happen to have such milk,
they are not for that reason to be unchaste.

     Upon the whole matter, the sum of what I have said
upon this head of virginity terminates in this: that when
a man is married and finds the tokens of his wife's
virginity upon the first act of copulation, he has all
the reason in the world to believe her such, and to rest
satisfied that he has married a virgin; but if on the
contrary, he finds them not, then he has no reason to
think her devirginated, if he finds her otherwise sober
and modest seeing the Hymen, or Claustrum Virginale, may
be broken in many other ways, and yet the woman be both
chaste and virtuous. Only let me caution virgins to take
all imaginable care to keep their virgin Zone entire,
that so, when they marry, they may be such as the great
Caesar wished his wife to be, that is, not only without
fault, but without suspicion also.

Thus have I virgin innocence survey'd,
And show'd the difference 'twixt wife and maid,
And that their chastity they need not fear
Whose virgin tokens plainly do appear.
Nor censure those in whom they do not so,
Unless the contrary they plainly know;
For they may yet unspotted virgins be,
Altho' their' virgin tokens none can see.

PART II.

THE SECRETS OF NATURE DISPLAYED IN THE PRODUCTION OF MAN.

CHAPTER 1.

WHAT CONCEPTION IS; WHAT IS PRE-REQUISITE THERETO; HOW A
WOMAN MAY KNOW WHETHER SHE HATH CONCEIVED, AND WHETHER A
BOY OR GIRL.

SEC. I. Of Conception, what it is, etc.

     HAVING, in the first part of this work, described
the instruments of generation in both sexes, and the use
for which those instruments were intended by nature, I
shall, in the part before me, proceed to show what
conception is; the signs and token thereof; and what are
the pre-requisites thereunto; for when once a woman has
conceived, the work of generation is begun, and time with
nature's help, will perfect the work.

     Now in conception, that which is first to be
regarded, and without which it cannot be, is the seed of
the man, that being the active principle, or efficient
cause of the foetus, the matter of which is arterial
blood and animal spirits, which are elaborated into seed
in the testicles, and from thence by proper vessels
conveyed into the yard, and in the act of copulation, it
is injected or emitted into the womb. The next thing is
the passive principle of the foetus (for there must be
both in order to conception) and this is an ovum or egg,
impregnated by the man's seed; on being conveyed to it
the womb closes up, that no air may enter therein, but
the impregnated ovum may swell into a foetus. This is
that  which is truly and properly conception, and the
pre-requisites thereunto I shall make the subject of the
next section.

SEC. II. Of the pre-requisites of Conception.

     I HAVE shown in the former section that there are
two things to be regarded chiefly in conception, to wit,
the active and passive principles. This in part shows
that difference of sexes is a prerequisite to conception.
So nature has ordained, there must be a proper vehicle
for the active principle to be injected thereinto, and
there must also be a passive principle to be impregnated
thereby; so the woman has no active principle to
impregnate, and therefore, without different sexes, there
can be no conception.

     Rut this is not all; for it is not enough that there
be different sexes, but these different sexes must unite,
and there must be coition, in order to conception; and it
is coition, or the mutual embraces of both sexes, which
nature has made so desirable to each other; which, when
authorised in the way heaven has ordained, there is no
need of ravishing; for the fair bride will quickly meet
her bridegroom with equal vigour. But since in that there
may be over-doing, and such errors committed by their
giving way to the impetuosity of their desires, as may be
prejudicial to conception, it will not be amiss to give
some directions to make this operation the more
effectual.

SEC. III. A Word of Advice to both Sexes; of Directions
respecting the Act of Coition or Carnal Copulation.

     TH0UGH there are some that desire not to have
children, and yet are very fond of nocturnal embraces, to
whom these directions will be no way acceptable, because
it may probably produce those effects which they had
rather be without; yet I doubt not but the generality of
both sexes, when in a married state. have such a desire
to produce the fair image of themselves, that nothing can
be more welcome to them than those directions that may
make their mutual embraces most effectual to that end;
and therefore let none think it strange that we pretend
to give directions for the promoting that which nature
itself teacheth all to perform; since 'tis no solecism
for art to be a handmaid to nature, and to assist her in
her noblest operations. Neither is it the bare performing
of that act which we here direct to, but the performing
of it so as to make conducive unto the work of
generation. And since this act is the foundation of
generation, and without which it cannot be, some care
ought to be taken, and, consequently, some advice given,
how to perform it well; and therein I am sure the proverb
is on our side, which tells us that what is once well
done is twice done. But yet what we shall advance on this
nice subject shall be offered with that caution, as not
to give offence to the chastest ear, nor put the fair sex
to the trouble of blushing. What I shall offer will
consist of two parts; First, something previous to it;
and secondly, something consequential to it.

     For the first, When married persons design to follow
the propensions of nature for the production of the fair
image of themselves, let everything that looks like care
and business be banished from their thoughts, for all
such things are enemies to Venus; and let their animal
and vital spirits be powerfully exhilarated by some brisk
and generous restoratives; and let them, to invigorate
their fancies, survey the lovely beauties of each other,
and bear the bright ideas of them in their minds; and if
it happens, that instead of beauty there is anything that
looks like imperfection or deformity (for nature is not
alike bountiful to all), let them be covered over with a
veil of darkness and oblivion. And since the utmost
intention of desire is required in this act, it may not
be amiss for the bridegroom, for the more eager
heightening of his joy, to delineate the scene of their
approaching happiness to his fair languishing bride, in
some such amorous rapture as this:

Now, my fair bride, now I will storm the mint
Of love and joy and rifle all that is in't.
Now my infranchis'd hand on ev'ry side,
Shall o'er thy naked polish'd ivory glide.
Freely shall now my longing eyes behold,
Thy bared snow, and thy undrained gold:
Nor curtain now, tho' of transparent lawn
Shall be before thy virgin treasure drawn.
I will enjoy thee now, my fairest; come,
And, fly with me to love's elysium;
My rudder with thy bold hand, like a try'd
And skilful pilot, thou shalt steer, and guide
My bark in love's dark channel, where it shall
Dance, as the bounding waves do rise and fall.
Whilst my tall pinnace in the Cyprian streight,
Rides safe at anchor, and unlades the freight.

Having by these and other amorous acts (which love can
better dictate than my pen) wound up your fancies to the
highest ardour and desires.

Perform those rites nature and love requires,
Till you have quench'd each other's am'rous fires.

When the act of coition is over, and the bridegroom has
done what nature prompted him to do, he ought to take
care not to withdraw too precipitately from the field of
love, lest he should, by so doing, let the cold into the
womb, which might be of dangerous consequence. But when
he has given time for the matrix to close up, he may
withdraw, and leave the bride to her repose, which ought
to be with all the calmness possible, betaking herself to
rest on the right side, and not removing without great
occasion, till she has taken her first sleep. Coughing
and sneezing if possible should be avoided, or anything
that agitates or causes a motion of the body. These
amorous engagements should not be often repeated till the
conception is confirmed. And it may not be amiss to
remind the bridegroom that the fair lasts all the year,
and that he should be careful not to spend his stock
lavishly, as women in general are better pleased in
having a thing once well done than often ill done.

SEC. IV. How a Woman may know when she has Conceived.

     AFTER the means made use of in order to conception,
according to the directions given before, there is reason
to expect that conception should follow; but as things do
not always succeed according to desire, so therefore
conception does not always follow upon coition. For there
are many women, especially those newly married, who know
not whether they have conceived or not, after coition;
which if they were assured of, they might and would avoid
several inconveniences which they now run upon. For, when
after conception a woman finds an alteration in herself,
and yet not knows from whence it arises, she is apt to
run to the doctor, and inquires of him what is the
matter, who not knowing that she is with child, gives her
a strong potion, which certainly destroys the conception.
There are others who, out of foolish bashful coyness,
though they know that they have conceived, yet will not
confess it, that they may be instructed how to order
themselves accordingly. Those that are coy may learn in
time to be wise; and for the sake of those that are
ignorant, I shall set down the signs of conception, that
women may know thereby whether they have conceived or
not.

     If a woman hath conceived, the vein under her eye
will be swelled, i.e., under the lower eyelid; the vein
in the eyes appearing clearly, and the eyes somewhat
discoloured; it the woman hath not her terms upon her,
nor hath watched the night before, there is a certain
sign of her having conceived; and this appears most
plainly just upon the conception, and holds for the first
two months after.

     Stop the urine of the woman close in a glass or
bottle three days, at the expiration of which time strain
it through a linen rag; if you perceive small living
creatures in it, you may instantly conclude that she hath
conceived; for the urine, which was before part of her
own substance, will be generative as well as its
mistress.

     A coldness and chillness of the outward parts after
copulation  shows a woman to have conceived, the heat
being retired to make the conception; and then the veins
of the breasts are more clearly seen than they were
before. The tops of the nipples look redder than
formerly; the body is weakened and the face discoloured;
the belly waxeth very fat, because the womb closes itself
together to nourish and cherish the seed. If she drinks
cold water a coldness is felt in the breast; she has also
loss of appetite, sour belchings, and exceeding weakness
of the stomach; the breasts begin to swell and wax hard,
not without pain or soreness; wringing or griping pains
like the cramp happen in the belly above the navel; also
divers appetites and longings are engendered. The veins
of the eyes are also clearly seen, and the eyes seem
something discoloured, as a looking-glass will show. The
excrements of the guts are voided painfully, because the
womb swelling, thrusteth the right gut together; likewise
let her take a green  nettle, and put it into her urine,
cover it closely, and let it remain all night; if she is
with child it will be full of red spots on the next
morning, if she is not with child it will be blackish.

      By these experiments, some of which never fail, a
woman may know whether she has conceived or not, and to
regulate herself accordingly. For

When women once with child conceived are,
They of themselves should take especial care.

SEC. V. How to know whether a Woman be conceived of a
male or female Child.

     IN the present section I shall endeavour to gratify
the curiosity of many persons who are very desirous to
know whether they are conceived of a male or female. For
the satisfaction of such, I shall give the sign of a male
child being conceived; and the reverse thereof, that of a
female.

     It is then a sign of a male child when the woman
feels it first on the right side of the womb; the woman
also when rising from her chair, doth sooner stay herself
upon the right hand than on the left. And also the belly
lies rounder and higher than when it is a female. The
colour of the woman is not so swarthy, but more clear
than when it is a girl. The right side is likewise more
plump and harder than the left, the right nipple redder.
She likewise breeds a boy easier and with less pain than
a girl, and carries her burthen not so heavily, but is
more nimble and stirring.

     I will only, as to this, add the following
experiments, which I never know to fail. If the circle
under the woman's eyes, which is of a wan blue colour, be
more apparent under the right eye, and that most
discoloured, she is with child of a boy; if the mark be
most apparent in her left eye, she is with child of a
girl. The other is, let her drop a drop of her milk in a
basin of fair water; if it sinks to the bottom as it
drops in, round in a drop, it is a girl she is with child
of; for if it be a boy it will spread and swim at top.
This I have often tried, and it never failed.

For whether male or female child it be
You have conceived by these rules you'll see.


CHAPTER II.
Sec. I. How a woman should order herself in order to
conception.

     I AM very well satisfied that many women desire
copulation, not from any delight or satisfaction they
take therein, more than as it is the means appointed by
Him that bids us increase and multiply, for the obtaining
of children and the propagation of mankind. And though
several make use of coition to obtain that end, yet we
find by experience, that in many it does not succeed,
because they order not themselves as they ought to do;
for though it must be granted that all our endeavours
depend upon the divine blessing, yet, if we are wanting
in anything to ourselves, how can we expect that blessing
to succeed our endeavours? My business therefore, in this
section shall be to show how women that desire to have
children should order themselves.

     1st.-- Women that are desirous to have children
must, in order thereunto give themselves to moderate
exercise; for want of exercise and idleness are very
great enemies to the work of generation, and indeed, are
enemies both to soul and body. Those that do give
themselves the trouble to observe it, will find those
city dames that live high and do nothing, seldom have
children, or if they have, they seldom live; whereas
those poor women that accustom themselves to labour have
many children, and those strong and lusty. Nor need we
wonder at it if we consider the benefit that comes by
moderate exercise and labour; for it opens the pores,
quickens the spirits, stirs up the natural heat,
strengthens the body, sense and spirits, comforts the
limbs, and helps nature in all her exercises, of which
procreation of children is none of the least.

     2nd.-- Women, in order to conception, should avoid
all manner of discontent, and the occasion of it; for
discontent is a great enemy. to conception; and it so
dispirits either man or woman, that it hinders them from
putting forth that vigour which ought to be exercised in
the act of coition. When on the contrary content and
satisfaction of mind dilate the heart and arteries,
whereby the vital blood and spirits are freely
distributed throughout the body; and then arise such
affections as please, recreate, and refresh the nature of
man; as hope, joy, love, gladness and mirth. Nor does it
only comfort and strengthen the body, but also the
operation and imagination of the mind; which is so much
the more necessary; inasmuch as the imagination of the
mother works forcibly upon the conception of the child.
Women, therefore, ought to take great care that their
imagination be pure and clear, that their child may be
well formed.

     3rd.-- Women ought to take care to keep the womb in
good order; and to see that the Menses come down as they
ought to do: for if they are discoloured they are out of
order. But if the blood comes down pure, then the woman
will be very prime to conceive with child, especially if
they use copulation in two or three days after the
monthly terms are stayed.

     4th.-- A woman that would conceive should observe
that she does not use the act of coition too often; for
satiety gluts the womb, and renders it unfit for its
office.

     There are two things that demonstrate this: i.e.
that common whores (who often use copulation) have never,
or rarely, any children; for the grass seldom grows in a
path that is commonly trodden in. The other is, that
women, whose husbands have been long absent, do, after
copulation with them again, conceive very quickly.

     5th.-- Care should be taken that the time of
copulation be convenient, that there may be no fear of
surprise: for fear hinders conception. And then it were
best also that the desire of copulation be natural, and
not stirred up by provocation; and if it be natural, the
greater the woman's desire of copulation is, the more
likely she is to conceive.

     I will add no more, but what some authors report,
that a lodestone carried about the woman not only causeth
conception, but concord between man and wife; if it be
true, I would have no married woman go without one, both
for her own and husband's quiet.

Let all the fair who would have children from
Their soft embraces, read what's here laid down;
Those that to exercise themselves incline,
And in their love to be content design.
Who have their monthly terms in order flow,
And regulate them if they do not so;
That love's embraces moderately use,
And to enjoy them a fit season choose.
These may content with what they've done remain,
And need not fear their wishes to obtain.

Sec. II. What a Woman ought to observe after conception.

     AFTER a woman has conceived, or has reason to think
so, she ought to be very careful of herself, lest she
should do anything that might hinder nature in her
operation. For in the first two months after conception,
women are very subject to miscarriages, because then the
ligaments are weak, and soon broken. To prevent this, let
the woman every morning drink a draught of sage ale, and
it will do her abundant good. And if signs of abortion or
miscarriage appear, let her lay a toast dipped in tent
(in case muscadale cannot be got) to the navel for this
is very good. Or let her take a little garden tansy, and
having bruised it, sprinkle it with muscadale, and apply
it to the navel, and she will find it  much better. Also
tea infused in ale, like sage ale, and a draught drunk
every evening, is most excellent for such women as are
subject to miscarriages. Also take juice of tansy,
clarify it, and boil it up into a syrup, with twice its
weight in sugar, and let a woman take a spoonful or two
of it in such cases, and it will be an excellent
preservative against miscarriages. Also if she can, let
her be where the air is temperate. Let her sleep be
moderate; let her also avoid all watching and immoderate
exorcise, as also disturbing passions, loud clamour and
filthy smells; and let her abstain from all things which
may provoke either urine or the courses; and also from
all sharp and windy meats; and let a moderate diet be
observed. If the excrements of the guts be retained,
lenify the belly with clysters made of the decoction of
mellows and violets, with sugar and common oil; or make
broth of borage, bugloss, beets, mallows, and take
therein a little manna; but, on the contrary, if she be
troubled with a looseness of the belly, let it not be
stopped without the judgment of a physician; for that
matter all uterine fluxes have a malignant quality, and
must be evacuated and removed before the flux be stayed.


CHAPTER III.

HOW A CHILD LIETH, AND HOW IT GROWETH UP IN THE WOMB OF
THE MOTHER AFTER CONCEPTION.
Sec. I. How the Child is formed in the Womb after
conception.

     As to the formation of the child, it is to be noted,
that after coition the seed lies warm in the womb for six
days without any visible alteration, only the womb closes
up itself to prevent it issuing forth again, and for the
securing it from any cold, and all this time it looks
like butter, or coagulated milk. And it would be very
necessary for her who has conceived to forbear the
embraces of her husband all the time, lest the conception
should be spoiled. In three days after it is altered from
the quality of thick milk or butter, and it becomes
blood, or at least resembles it in colour, nature having
now begun to work upon it. In the next six days
following, that blood begins to be united into one body,
grows hard, and becomes a little quantity, and to appear
a round lump. And as the first creation of the earth was
void, and without form, so in this creating work of
divine power in the womb, this shapeless embryo lies like
the first mass. But in two days after, the principal
members are formed by the plastic power of nature, and
these principal members are four in number, viz., The
heart, the brain, the liver, and the testicles, or
stones. Three days after the other members are formed,
and are distinguished from the shoulders to the knees;
and the heart, liver, and stones, with their
appurtenances, grow bigger and bigger. Four days after
that, the several members of the whole body appear, and
as nature requires, they conjunctly and separately do
receive their perfection. And so in the appointed time,
the whole creation hath that essence which it ought to
have in the perfection of it, receiving from God a living
soul, therewith putting into his nostrils the breath of
life. Thus have I shown the whole operations of nature in
the formation of the child in the womb, according to the
energy given it by the divine Creator, Maker, and
Upholder of all things both in heaven and earth.

     By some others more briefly, but to the same
purpose, the forming of the child in the womb of its
mother is thus described; three days in the milk, three
days in the blood, twelve days from the flesh, and
eighteen the members, and forty days afterwards the child
is inspired with life, being endowed with an immortal
living soul.
Sec. II. Of the Manner of the Child's lying in the Womb
from the Conception to the Birth.

     I COME now to show in what manner the child lies in
the womb of its mother, whilst it is confined in the dark
recesses; first giving the reader the testimony of two or
three of the most learned on that head.

     The learned Hippocrates affirms that the child, as
he is placed in the womb, hath his hands upon his knees,
and his head bent to his feet; so that he lies round
together, his hands upon his knees, and his face between
them; so that each eye touches each thumb, and his nose
betwixt his knees. And of the same opinion in this matter 
was Bartholinus the younger. Columbus is of opinion that
the figure of the child in the womb is round, the right
arm bowed, the fingers thereof tinder the ear, and above
the neck, the head bowed that the chin toucheth the
breast, the left arm bowed above both breast and face,
and propped up by the bending of the right elbow; the
legs are lifted upwards, the right of which is so lifted
up that the thigh toucheth the belly, the knees the
navel, the heel toucheth the left buttock, and the foot
is turned back and covereth the secrets; the left thigh
toucheth the belly, and the leg lifted up to the breast,
the back lying outwards.

     Thus the readers may see how authors differ herein;
but it ought to be noted, that different positions which
the child has been seen in, hath given occasion to the
different opinions of authors. For when the woman is
young with child, the embryo is always found of a round
figure, a little oblong, having the spine moderately
turned inwards, the thighs folded and a little raised, to
which the legs are joined; that the heels touch the
buttocks, the arms bending, and the hands placed upon the
knees, towards which the head is inclined forwards; so
that the chin touches the breast; the spine of the back
is at that time placed towards the mother's, the head
uppermost, and proportionable to its growth it extends
its members by little and little, which were exactly
formed in the first month. In this posture it usually
keeps till the seventh or eighth month, and then by a
natural propensity and disposition of the upper parts of
the body, the head is turned downwards towards the inward
orifice of the womb, tumbling as it were ever its head;
so that the feet are uppermost, and the face towards the
mother's great gut. And this turning of the infant in
this manner with his head downwards, towards the latter
end of a woman's reckoning, is so ordered of nature that
it may be the better dispose for the birth. The knowledge
of these things being so essential to the practice of a
midwife, I could not omit them.


CHAPTER IV.
OF THE OBSTRUCTION OF CONCEPTION; WITH THE CAU5E AND CURE
OF BARRENNESS, AND THE SIGNS OF INSUFFICIENCY BOTH IN MEN
AND WOMEN.

     BEFORE I proceed any further, it is highly necessary
that I treat of the obstructions of conception: which
naturally leads me to treat of barrenness, the grand
obstruction of conception.
SEC. I. Of Barrenness.

     BARRENNESS is a natural and accidental defect, which
hinders conception: for that which hinders conception
causeth barrenness. There are several causes why
conception may be hindered; as too much heat or cold
dries up the seed, and makes it corrupt; this
extinguishes the life of the seed, and that making it
waterish, and unfit for generation. It may be caused also
by the stoppage of the over-flowing of the courses, and
by swellings, ulcers, or inflammations of the womb, or by
an excrescence of flesh growing about the mouth of the
Matrix, whereby the seed is hindered from being injected
into the womb; and want of love in persons copulating may
also hinder conception, as it is apparent from those
women that are deflowered against their will; no
conception following any forced copulation.

     And here let me caution parents against one thing
that often causeth barrenness, which might easily be
prevented: and that is, against letting virgins blood in
the arm before their courses come down: these come down
in virgins usually in the fourteenth year of their age,
seldom before the thirteenth, but never before the
twelfth. Now, because usually young virgins are out of
order before they first break down, the mother goes with
her to  the doctor, who, finding that fulness of blood is
the occasion of her illness, orders her to be let blood
in the arm; upon which she becomes well for a time, the
superfluous blood being taken away: and this remedy,
which is worse than the disease, being repeated four or
five times, the blood comes not down at all to the womb,
as it does in other women, but dries up, and is for ever
barren; whereas, had she been let blood in the foot, it
would have brought the blood downwards, and so have
provoked the terms, and prevented the mischief.

     Another cause of barrenness is for want of
convenient moderate equality, which the woman ought to
have with the man; as if he be hot, she must be cold; if
he be dry, she moist; but if they are both dry, or both
of a moist constitution, they cannot propagate, though in
this case neither of them may be barren, singly
considered; for he or she, though now as barren as the
barren fig-tree, yet joined with an apt constitution, may
become as fruitful as the vine.

     Another cause of barrenness may be the disuse of
copulation: for some there are of that frigid
constitution, that they either use not the means at all,
or else perform it with so much languor and coldness,
that it is not likely it should prove efficacious: for
the act of coition should be performed with the greatest
ardour and intenseness of desire imaginable, or else they
may as well let it alone; a frigid disposition being the
effect of a cold distemper, and must be cured by such
things as heat and nourishment. For

Without good drink and feeding high,
Desire to Venus soon will die.


     Such, therefore, ought to feed upon cock stones,
lamb stones, sparrows, partridges, quails, and pheasant's
eggs; for 'tis an infallible aphorism in physic, that
whatsoever any creature is extremely addicted to they
operate to the same end by their mutual virtue in the man
that eats them. Therefore, partridges, quails, sparrows,
etc., being extremely addicted to venery, they work the
same effect in those who eat them: and this likewise is
worthy to be noted that in what part of the body the
faculty that you would strengthen lies, take the same
part of another creature in whom that faculty is strong,
as a medicine: therefore, cock stones, etc., are
medicinal in this distemper. Let such persons also eat
such food as is very nourishing, as parsnips, alisanders,
skirits, and pine nuts; and let them take a dram of
diatryon as an electuary every morning. The stones of a
fox dried to a powder, a dram taken every morning in
tent, is also very good in this case; and so also is a
dram of satyrion roots, taken in like manner.


     SECT. II. Of the Signs of Insufficiency in Men; and
Barrenness  in Women.

     AFTER married people have lived long together, and
both seem likely, and yet neither of them have had
children, there often arises discontent between them, and
both are troubled because they know not on what side the
fault is. And though authors have left several ways to
know whether the man or the woman be defective, yet,
because I cannot confide in their judgments, I shall pass
them by in silence, and rather lay down a few rules that
may be depended upon, than many that are uncertain. But I
must premise that women are subject to so many
infirmities more than men, that the cause of barrenness
is oftener on their side than the man's. For if the man
has the instrument of generation perfect, being in
health, and keeping a regular and temperate diet and
exercise, I know of no accidental cause of barrenness in
him; whereas the cause of barrenness in a woman lies in
her womb, and the infirmities incident thereunto; some of
which are stopping of the Menstrua, or their over-
flowing; as also the falling out thereof, and the
inflammation, windiness, heat, and dryness thereof; for
each of which we shall prescribe proper cures. but to be
more particular.

     If a man or a woman, in whom the instruments of
generation appear in no way defective, would know whether
the cause of barrenness be in themselves or their bed-
fellow, let them take a handful of barley, or any other
corn that will grow quickly and steep half of it in the
urine of the man, and the other half of it in the urine
of the woman, during the space of twenty-four hours. Then
take it out and set it, the man's by itself, and the
woman's by itself, in a flower pot, or something else,
where you may keep them dry. Then water the man's every
morning with his own urine, and the woman's with hers;
and that which grows is most fruitful: and that which
does not grow, denotes the person barren.

     Nor let any despise this trial, for seeing
physicians will by urine undertake to tell a person of
his or her diseases, why should not urine also show
whether a person be fruitful or not? But if in a man the
instrument of generation is not perfect it will be
obvious to the sight; and if the yard be so feeble that
it will not admit of erection, it can never convey the
seed into the womb, nor can there be in such a case any
conception. But this is so plain and easily discerned
that it needs must be obvious to both parties, and the
man who finds himself debilitated ought not to marry.

     The case can't be so bad with the woman, though she
be barren, but what her husband may make use of her,
unless she be impenetrable, which (though it sometimes
does) yet but rarely and therefore the man is the most
inexcusable if he transgress.

     Besides what I have already mentioned, signs of
barrenness in women are: if she be of an over hot
constitution, of a dry body, subject to anger, hath black
hair, a quick pulse, her purgations flow but little, and
that with pain, and yet has a violent desire to coition;
but if she be of a cold constitution then are the signs
contrary to those recited. If barrenness be caused
through an evil quality of the womb, it may be known by
making a suffumigation of red storax, myrrh, caffia wood,
nutmeg, cinnamon, and letting her receive the fume of it
into her womb covering her very close. If the odour
passeth through the body up into the mouth and nostrils
she is fruitful. But if she feel not the fume in her
mouth and nose, it denotes barrenness one of these ways,
viz., That the seed is either through cold extinguished, 
or through heat dissipated. And if a woman be suspected
to be unfruitful, cast natural brimstone, such as is dug
out of the mine, into her urine, and if worms breed
therein she is fruitful. But this shall suffice to be
said of the causes and signs of barrenness, as 'tis now
time to proceed to the cure.


     SECT. III. Of the Cure of Barrenness.

     IN the cure of barrenness respect must be had to the
cause; for the cause must be first removed, and then the
womb strengthened, and the spirits of the seed enlivened
by corroborating applications.

     if barrenness proceeds from over much heat, let her
use inwardly, succory, endive, violets, water-lillies,
sorrel and lettuce, with syrups and conserves made there
of thus:

     Take conserve of borage, violets, succory, water-
lillies, of each an ounce, half an ounce of conserve of
roses: diamarganition frigid. Diatryon, sancalon, of each
half a dram; with syrup violets, or juice of citron, make
an electuary.

     Let her also take of endive, water-lillies, borage
flowers of each a handful, rhubarb, myrobolans of each
three drams, with water make a decoction; add to the
straining, the syrup laxative of violets one ounce, syrup
of cassia half an ounce, manna three drams; make all into
a potion. Take of the syrup of mugwort one ounce, syrup
of maidenhair two ounces, pulv. elect. trionsat. make all
up into a julep. Apply to the veins and privities
fomentations of the juice of lettuce violets, roses,
mallows, vine leaves and nightshade: let her also anoint
her secret parts with the cooling ointment of galls.
Baths are good for her to sit in. Let the air be clear,
her garments thin, her food lettuce, endive, succory, and
barley; but let her have no hot meats nor strong wines,
except it be waterish and thin. Rest is good for her both
in body and mind; she must use but little copulation, but
may sleep as much as she will.

     If barrenness be occasioned by the predominancy of
cold, extinguishing the power of the seed, which may be
known by her desiring venery, and receiving no pleasure
in the act of copulation, even while the man is spending
his seed; her terms are phlegmatic, thick, slimy and now
not rightly: in this case let her take syrup of calamint,
mugwort, betony, of each one ounce, water of pennyroyal,
featherfew, hyssop, sage, of each two ounces; and make a
julep. Let her take every morning two spoonfuls of
cinnamon water, with one scruple of mithridate. Also let
her take oil of aniseed one scruple and a half,
jessamine, diachylon both, dinoschi diaglang of each one
dram; sugar four ounces; with  water of cinnamon make
lozenges, and take of them a dram and a half twice a day,
two hours before meals. Let her also fasten cupping
glasses to her hips and belly, and let her take storax,
calamite one ounce; mastich, cloves, cloves, cinnamon,
nutmeg, lignum, aloes, frankincense, of each half an
ounce, musk ten grains, ambergrease half a scruple, with
rosewater make a confection; divide it into four parts,
of one make a pomum odoratum to swell to, if she be not
hysterical; of the second, make a mass of pills and let
her take three every  night; of the third, make a
pessary, and put it up; of the fourth, make a
suffumigation for the womb.

     If barrenness arises from the faculties of the womb
being weakened, and the life of the seed suffocated by
over much humidity flowing on those parts, let her take
of betony, marjoram, mugwort, pennyroyal, balm, of each
one handful; root of onrum, fennel,  elecampane of each
two drams; aniseed, cummin seed, of each a dram, with
sugar and water a sufficient quantity, of which make a
syrup, take three ounces every other morning. Then purge
with these pills following: take of pu. ext. two 
scruples; diagridion two grains; species de castor one
scruple, make them up into nine pills with syrup of
mugwort. Also take spec. diagmme diamoschl, diambre, of
each one dram; cinnamon one dram and a half; mace,
cloves, nutmegs, of each half a dram; sugar six ounces
with syrup of featherfew make lozenges to be taken every
morning. Likewise let her take the decoction of
sarsaparilla and viga aurea,  with a good quantity of
sage, which is a herb of that virtue that Cornelius
Agrippa honoured it with the title of Sacra Herba, a holy
herb; and Dodonæus, in his history of plants, reports
that after a great plague had happened in Egypt, which
had almost depopulated the country, the surviving women
were commanded to drink the juice of sage, that they
might multiply the faster. Let her also anoint her
genitals with the oil of aniseed and spikenard. Trochisks
to smother the womb are also very good. To make which let
her take mace, cinnamon, storax, amber of each one dram:
cloves, laden, of each half a dram; turpentine a
sufficient quantity. Lastly, take the roots of valerian
and elecampane, of each one pound; of galangal three
ounces; origan, lavender, marjoram, betony, mugwort, bay-
leaves, calamint, of each three handfuls; with water make
an infusion, in which let her sit after she has her
courses. But to proceed.

     If barrenness be caused by the dryness of the womb
consuming the matter of the seed, let her take every day
almond milk and goat's milk extracted with honey; eat
often of the root satyrion candied, and of the electuary
of disatyron. Let her also take three sheep's heads, and
boil them till the flesh comes from the bone, then take
of the mileot, violets, camomile, mercury, orchies, with
the roots of each, one pound; fenugreek, linseed,
valerian roots, of each a handful; let all these be
decocted in the aforesaid broth and let the woman sit in
the decoction up to the navel.

     Also take of deer's suet half an ounce; cow's
marrow, styracis liquidæ, of each a dram; oil of sweet
almonds two ounces, with silk or cotton make a pessary,
and make injections only of fresh butter and oil of sweet
almonds.

     It sometimes happens that barrenness is caused by
remissness in the manner of the act of coition; and
though there be no impediment on either side, yet if both
sexes meet not in that act with equal vigour, no
conception follows; for many times the man is too quick
for the woman, or rather, the woman too slow for the man,
and is not prepared to receive the seed with that delight
which she ought, when it is emitted by the man; and those
who follow the opinion of the ancients, that the woman
contributes seed in the formation of the child as well as
the man, are of opinion that there ought to be a joint
emission both of the man and woman at the same instant,
which, administering to both a very great delight,
perfects the work of conception. But if in this case the
woman be slack, it will be proper for the man to follow 
the advice given in Chap. III., Sect. 2, where both sexes
are shown how to manage themselves in the act of coition,
that by so stirring up in the woman a desire for venery,
she may meet his embraces with the greatest ardour. If
this should prove ineffectual, let her before the act of
coition foment the privities with the decoction of
betony, sage, hyssop, and calamint, anoint the mouth and
head of the womb with musks and civet; and the cause of
barrenness being removed, let the womb be corroborated by
the following applications.

     Take of bay berries, mastich, nutmeg, frankincense,
cypress nuts, zadani, galbani, of each one dram; styracis
liquidæ, two scruples; cloves half a scruple;
ambergrease, two grains; musk, six grains; then with oil
of spikenard, make a pessary. Also take red roses, with
frankincense, lapidis hæmatitis, of each half an ounce;
sanguis draconis, fine bole mastich, of each two drams;
nutmeg, cloves, of each one dram; spikenard, half a
scruple, and with oil of wormwood make a plaster for the
lower part of the belly. And let her eat of eryngo roots,
candied, and make an injection of the juice of the roots
of satryon; and then let her use copulation soon after
the menses are ceased. Conception being most apt to
follow: for then the womb is thirsty and dry, and aptest
both to draw the seed and to retain it by the roughness
of the inward superfices. A woman should be careful to
avoid excess in all things, as being the greatest enemy
to conception. For, should a woman conceive under care,
study, etc., the child will probably he foolish, because
the animal faculties of the parents were confused.


CHAPTER V.

HOW WOMEN OUGHT TO GOVERN THEMSELVES DURING THEIR
PREGNANCY.

     FIRST, let a woman that is with child choose a
temperate air, not infected with fogs, and for that
reason not near any marshy grounds, rivers, etc. But this
cannot be avoided by some, their habitation falling out
to be in such places. But those who can live where they
please ought to avoid such places; as likewise the going
abroad in too hot or cold weather; also when the south
wind blows hard, for that often proves hurtful to women
with child, .and sometimes causes abortion.

     Secondly, She ought also to be very cautious in the
matter of her diet, choosing only those meats that create
wholesome nourishment, and such as are moderately dry:
and let her take care to prevent and avoid immoderate
fasting, for that will weaken the infant, and render it
of a sickly constitution, and sometimes causes abortion.
And as all excesses are to be avoided, so they must take
care not only of immoderate fasting, but likewise
immoderate eating too, which will riot only be apt to
stuff up the child, but to swell it up to that degree,
that it will endanger the life of itse1f and the mother
in its birth. Let it suffice that in general she avoid
all meats which are too hot, or too cold and moist; such
as salads, spices, and hot meats, which often cause the
child to be born before its time; and sometimes without
nails, which foreshows a short life. And therefore, in
this case, the most wholesome meats are pigeons.,
partridges, pheasants, larks, veal, mutton, or any meat
that yields a good juice, and contributes kindly
nourishments; as also such fruits as are sweet ad of easy
digestion, as cherries, pears, damsons, and the like. But
let her avoid, as pernicious, all such things as cause
and create wind.

     Care ought also to be taken with respect to her
exercise, which ought to be moderate; for violent motion,
either in walking or working, is hurtful and disturbing
to the womb, especially riding upon the stones in a
coach, or any other uneven place: and in the like manner
all extraordinary sounds and noises should be avoided,
especially the ringing of hells, and the discharging of
great guns; neither ought she to give way to either
immoderate laughing or weeping, or to anger, or any other
passion, for that may be prejudicial to her.


     SECT. II. Further Rules for Women to observe during
their Pregnancy.

     THOUGH the act of coition is that without which
conception cannot be, yet the immoderate use of it
hinders the chief end for which it was designed. In the
first four months after conception she ought not to lie
with her husband, at least sparingly, lest, by shaking
the womb in that action, the courses should again be
forced down. In the fifth and sixth, months she ought
also to abstain; but in the seventh, eighth and ninth, it
may freely he permitted, by reason it opens the passage,
and facilitates the birth. To contribute the better
towards which, the woman should he careful to keep her
body soluble; syrups and other opening things being very
helpful to nature in those operations. Let her not lace
too close, lest the child be thereby hindered from coming
to its full growth.

     To prevent any disorder that may happen to her
breasts by too much blood, which will cause curdled milk,
let her wear a necklace of gold about her neck, or rather
a small ingot of steel between her breats, fomenting them
a quarter of an hour every morning with water distilled
from round ivy, periwinkle, and sage, being blood warm.

     When her body is swelling, and the motion is great,
which will be about the fourth month, she may swathe it
with a swatheband anointed with pomatum or any other
thing of that kind, to keep it smooth and free from
wrinkles. For which end it will be best to take of the
caul of a kid, and of a sow, of each three ounces; capon
grease and goose grease, of each one ounce and a half;
and, having melted them altogether, put thereto a quarter
of a pint of water; after which strain them through a
linen cloth into fair water, casting it to and fro
therein till it be white; at which time add to it the
marrow of a red deer one ounce, and lay it in red rose
water twelve hours. After the expiration of which you may
use it, anointing the swathe and belly.

     But if these ingredients are not easy to be had, you
may make use of the following liniment, which will do
almost as well as the other; take of mutton suet (that
which grows above the kidneys is best) and of dog's
grease, of each two ounces, whale oil one ounce, and oil
of sweet almonds the same quantity; wash them well, after
they are melted together in the water of germander, or
new white wine, and anoint the belly and swathe
therewith. Those that care not to anoint their bellies
may make use of the following bath or decoction: take of
all sorts of mallow, and of motherwort, each two
handfuls; white lily roots three ounces; meliot and
camomile, of each two handfuls; lime seeds, quince seeds,
and fenugreek seeds, three ounces; boil them well in
spring water, and bathe therewith. If the woman, after
her quickening, finds but little motion of the infant in
her womb, let her make a quilt in the manner following,
and bind it upon the navel, and it will much strengthen
and comfort the infant: take the powder of roses, red
coral, and jelly-flowers, of each two ounces; mastich a
dram; angelica seeds two drams; ambergrease two grains;
and musk two grains; all which being well beaten, put
them into a linen bag, spread them abroad, and quilt it,
that they may be in every part of it, placing it upon the
navel, and it will have the desired effect. These things
are sufficient to be observed during the time of
pregnancy, that neither child nor mother may miscarry,
but be brought to the birth at the appointed time.


CHAPTER VI.

DIRECTIONS FOR MIDWIVES H0W TO ASSIST WOMEN IN THE TIME
OF THEIR LABOUR; AND H0W CHILDBEARING WOMEN SHOULD BE
ORDERED IN THE TIME OF THEIR LYING-IN.

     SECT. I. How a Midwife ought to be qualified.

     A MIDWIFE ought to be of middle age, neither too old
nor too young, not subject to diseases, fears, or sudden
frights; nor are the qualifications assigned to a good
surgeon improper for a midwife, viz., A lady's hand, a
hawk's eye, and a lion's heart; to which it may be added
activity  of body and a convenient strength, with caution
and diligence; not subject to drowsiness, nor apt to be
impatient. She ought to be sober and affable, not subject
to passion, but bountiful and compassionate and her 
temper cheerful and pleasant, that she may the better
comfort her patients in their sorrow. Nor must she be
very hasty, though her business may perhaps require her
in another place, lest she should make more haste than
good speed. But above all, she ought to be qualified with
the fear of God, which is the principal thing in every
state and condition, and will furnish her on all
occasions both with knowledge and discretion. But now I
proceed to more particular directions.


     SECT. II. What must be done when the Woman's time of
Labour is come.

     When the time of birth draws near, and the good
woman finds her travailing pains begin to come upon her,
let her send for a midwife in time, better too soon than
too late, and get things ready which are proper upon such
occasions. When the midwife is come, let the first thing
she does be to find whether the true time of the birth be
come. The want of observing this hath spoiled many a
child, and endangered the life of the mother, or at least
put her to twice as much pain as she needed: for
unskilful midwives, not minding this, have given things
to force down the child, and thereby disturbed the
natural course of her labours; whereas nature works best
in her own time and way. I do confess it is somewhat
difficult to know the true time of some women's labour,
they being troubled with pains so long before their true
hour comes; in some, weeks before: the reason of which is
the heat of the reins, which is manifest by the swelling
of the legs. And therefore when women with child find
their legs to swell much, they may be assured their reins
are too hot. wherefore, my advice to such women is to
cool their reins before the time of their labour, which
may be effectually done by anointing the reins of the
back with the oil of poppies and violets, or water-
lilies, and they may avoid that hard labour which they
usually undergo whose reins are hot: which, that they may
the better prevent, Let me recommend to you the decoction
of plantain leaves and roots, which is thus made: make a
strong decoction of them in water and then, having
strained and clarified it with the white of an egg, boil
it into a syrup with its equal weight of sugar, and keep
it for use. But since it is so necessary for midwives to
know the true time of a woman's labour, the following
section will rightly inform them.


     SECT. III. Signs by which the true time of a woman's
Labour may be known.

     when women draw near to the time of their reckoning,
especially with the first child, and perceive any
extraordinary pains in their belly, they immediately send
for their midwife, as taking it for their labour, though
perhaps those pains which are so often mistaken for
labour are only caused by the cholic, and proceed from
wind; which pains, though they come and go, griping the
whole belly, are yet without any forcing downward into
the womb, as is done by those that go before labour. But
these cholic pains may be removed by warm cloths laid
upon the belly, and the application of a clyster or two,
by which those pains that precede a true labour are
rather furthered than hindered. There are also other
pains incident to women in that condition from the flux
of the belly, which are easily known by the frequent
stools that follow them.

     But to speak more directly of the matter; the signs
of labour some few days before, are: that the woman's
belly, which before lay high, sinks down, and hinders her
from walking so easily as she used to do; also there
flows from the womb slimy humours, which nature  has
appointed to moisten and make smooth the passage, that
its inward orifice may be the more easily dilated when
there is occasion, which, beginning to open at that time,
suffers that slime to flow away, which proceeds from the
glands called prestætæ. These are signs preceding labour.

     But when she is presently falling into labour, the
signs are, great pains about the reins and loins, at
which, coming and retreating by intervals, answer in the
bottom of the belly by congruous throws; and sometimes
the face is red and inflamed, the blood being much heated
by the endeavours a woman makes to bring forth the child;
and likewise because during the strongest throws her
perspiration is intercepted, which causes the blood to
have recourse to her face; her privy parts are also
swelled by the infant's head lying in the birth, which by
often thrusting, causes those parts to distend outward.
She is likewise much subject to vomiting, which is also a
sign of good labour and speedy delivery, though by a
great many ignorant women thought otherwise; for good
pains are hereby excited and redoubled, which vomiting is
occasioned by the sympathy there is between the womb and
the stomach. Also when the birth is near, most women are
troubled with a trembling of the thighs and legs; not
with cold, like the beginning of an ague fit, but with
the heat of the whole body; though this indeed does not
happen always. Also, if the humours which then flow from
the womb are discoloured with blood (which is what the
midwife calls shows), it is an infallible mark of the
birth being near: and then if the midwife puts her finger
up the neck of the womb, she will find the inner orifice
dilated; at the opening of which the membrane of the
infant containing the waters, present themselves, and are
strongly forced downwards with each pain she hath; at
which time one may perceive them sometimes to resist the
finger, and then again to press forwards, being more or
less hard and extended, according as the pains are
stronger or weaker. These membranes with the water in
them, when they are before the head of the child, which
the midwives call the gathering of the womb, resembles to
the touch of the fingers those eggs which have yet no
shell, but are covered only by a simple membrane. After
this the pains still redoubling, the membranes are broken
by the strong impression of the waters, which presently
flow away, and then the head of the infant is presently
felt naked and presents itself at the inward orifice of
the womb. When those waters come thus away, then the
midwife may be assured the birth is very near, this being
the most certain sign that can be, for the Amnion and
Allantois being broken (which contained those waters) by
the pressing forward of the birth, the child is no more
able to subsist in the womb afterwards than a naked man
in a heap of snow. Now these waters, if the child come
presently after them, facilitate the labour, by making
the passage slippery: and therefore let no midwife use
means to force away the water; for nature knows best when
the true time of the birth is, and therefore retains the
water till the time; but if by accident the water breaks
away too long before the birth, then such things as will
hasten it may be safely administered.


     SECT. IV. What is to be done at the time of labour.

     When the midwife is satisfied that it is the true
time of labour, she must take care to get all things
ready that are necessary to comfort the travailing woman
in that time; and the better to do it, let her see that
she be not straight laced. She may also give her a pretty
strong clyster, if she finds there is occasion for it;
but with this proviso, that it be done at the beginning
and before the child lie too forward; for otherwise it
will be difficult for her to receive it. The advantage of
which clyster is, that the gut thereby will ho excited to
discharge itself of its excrements, and the Rectum being
emptied there will be more space for the dilating of the
passage; likewise to cause the pains to bear more
downwards, through the endeavours she makes when other
necessary things for her labour to put in order, both for
the mother and the child.

     As to the manner of the delivery, various midwives
use different ways; some are delivered sitting on a
midwife's stool. But, for my own part, I think that a
pallet bed, girded, and placed near the fire, that the
good woman may come on each side, and be the more readily
assisted, is much the best way.

     And if the labouring woman abounds with blood, it
may not be improper to let her bleed a little; for by
that means she wilt both breathe the better, and have her
breath more at liberty, and likewise more strength to
bear down her pain: and this may be done without danger,
because the child being now ready to be born, needs not
the mother's blood for its nourishment any longer; and
not only so, but this evacuation does many times prevent
her having a fever after delivery. Likewise, if her
strength will permit, let her walk up and down her
chamber; and the better to enable her thereto, let her
take some good strengthening things such as new laid
eggs, jelly, broth, some spoonfuls of burnt wine; and
encourage her to hold off her pain, bearing them down
when they take her all that she can. And let the midwife
often touch the inward orifice with her finger, that she
may better know whether the waters are going to break,
and whether the birth will follow soon after; for
generally the birth follows in two hours after the afflux
of the water. And to help it afterwards, let her anoint
the woman's privities with emollient oil, hog grease, and
fresh butter; especially if she find them too hard to be
dilated.

     Let the midwife also be near the labouring woman all
the while, and diligently observe her gestures, pains and
complaints; for by this she may guess pretty well how her
labour goes forward; for when she changes her groans into
loud cries it is a great sign the birth is near; at which
time her pains are greater and more frequent. Let her
also sometimes rest herself on her bed to increase her
strength, but not too long at a time, for to lie too long
at a time will retard her labour, and therefore it is
better for her to walk about her chamber as much as she
can; which, that she may the better do, let the good
woman support her under her arms, if it be necessary; for
by walking, the weight of the child causes the inward
orifice of the womb to dilate much sooner than it would
do if she lay upon her bed; besides, by walking, her
pains will be stronger and frequenter, and by consequence
her labour will not be near so long. If she finds any
sick qualms let her not he discouraged; and if she finds
any motions to vomit, let her not suppress them, but
rather give way to them; for it wi1l (however uneasy and
irksome they be for the present) be much for her benefit,
because they further the pains and provoke downwards.



     SECT. V. How to provide the Birth, and cause speedy
Delivery.

     When the birth is long deferred after the coming
down of the waters, let her hasten the birth by drinking
a good draught of wine wherein dittany, red coral,
juniper berries, betony, penny royal, and featherfew have
been boiled, or the juice of featherfew taken in its
prime (which is in May) and clarified, and so boiled up
in a syrup, and twice its weight of sugar, is very good
upon this occasion. Also mugwort used in the same manner
works the same effect. And so also does a dram of
cinnamon in powder given inwardly, or tansy bruised and
applied to the privities. Likewise the stone Ætites held
to the privities does in a very little time draw forth
the child and the after-burden, but great care must be
taken to remove it gently, or else it will draw forth the
womb and all, so great is its magnetic delivery. Also a
decoction of savory made with white wine and drank gives
a woman speedy delivery. Also wild tansy or silverweed
bruised and applied to the woman's nostrils is very good.
So also are date stones beaten to powder, and half a dram
of them taken in white wine: parsley is of excellent use
on this occasion; for if you bruise it and press out the
juice, and then dip a linen cloth in it and put it up;
being so dipped into the mouth of the womb, it will
presently cause the child to come away though it be dead,
and will bring away the after-burden also. The juice of
parsley being of great virtue, especially the stone
parsley, being drank by a woman with child, it cleareth
not only the womb, but also the child in the womb of all
gross humours. A scruple of castorum in powder in any
convenient liquor is very good to be taken in such a
case, and so also are two or three drops of spirit of
castorum in any convenient liquor. Eight or nine drops of
the spirit of myrrh, given in a convenient liquor, have
the same effect. Or give a woman in travail another
woman's milk to drink; it will cause speedy delivery.
Also the juice of leeks being drunk with warm water hath
a mighty operation, coinage speedy delivery. Take peony
seed, beat them to powder, and mix the powder with oil;
with which oil anoint the loins and privities of the
woman with child; it gives her deliverance very speedy,
and with less pain than can be imagined. And this may be
noted for a general rule: that all those things that move
the terms are good for making the delivery easy. There
arc several other things efficacious in this case; but I
need not heap medicines unnecessary, those I have already
named being sufficient.

     When any of the forenamed medicines have hastened
the birth, let the midwife lay the woman in a posture for
delivery. And first, let the woman be conducted to the
pallet bed, placed at a convenient distance from the
fire, according to the season of the year; and let there 
be a quilt laid, and let it have thereon a linen cloth in
many folds, with such other things as are necessary,
which may he changed according as the occasion requires
it: that so the woman may not be incommoded with blood,
waters, and other filth, which are voided in labour. Then
let her lay the woman upon her back, having her head a
little raised by the help of a pillow, having the like
help to support her reins and buttocks, that her rump may
lie high; for if she lie low she cannot very well be
delivered. Then let her keep her knees and thighs as far
asunder as she can, her legs being bowed towards her
buttocks, and let her feet be stayed against a log or
some other firm thing; and let two women hold her two
shoulders, that she may strain out the birth with more
advantage, holding in her breath, and forcing herself as
much as possible, in like manner as when she goes to
stool: for by such straining the diaphragm, or midriff,
being strongly thrust downwards, necessarily forces down
the womb, and the child in it. In the meantime let the
midwife encourage her all she can, and take care that she
have no rings on her hand when she anoints the parts:
then with her finger let her gently dilate the inward
orifice of the womb; and putting her fingers in the entry
thereof, stretch them from one another when her pains
take her; by this means endeavour to help forward the
child, and thrusting by little and little the sides of
the orifice towards the hinder part of the child's head,
anointing those parts with fresh butter, in case it is
necessary. And when the head of the infant is somewhat
advanced into this inward orifice, it is usual among
midwives to say it is crowned, because it both girds and
surrounds it like a crown; but when it is gone so far,
and the extremity begins to appear without the privy
parts, they then say the child is in the passage; and at
this time woman feels herself as if she was scratched or
pricked with pins, and is ready to think that the midwife
hurts her; whereas in truth it is only occasioned by the
violent distension of those parts, which sometimes even
suffer laceration through the bigness of the child's
head. When things are come to this posture, let the
midwife seat herself conveniently to receive the child,
which will now come very quickly, and with her fingers'
end, which she ought also to keep pared, let her
endeavour to thrust the crowning of the womb back over
the head of the child. And as soon as it is advanced as
far as the ears, or thereabouts, let her take hold of the
sides with her two hands, and wait till the good pain
comes, and then quickly draw forth the child, taking care
that the navel string be not entangled about the child's
neck, or any other part, as sometimes it is, lest thereby
the after burden be pulled with violence, and perhaps the
womb also, to which it is fastened, and so either cause
her to flood, or else break the string, both which are of
bad consequence to the woman, and render her delivery the
more difficult. Great care must be taken that the head be
not drawn forth straight, but shake it a little from one
side to the other, that the shoulders may the sooner and
easier take its place immediately after it is past; which
must be done without losing any time, lest the head being
passed, the child stops there by the largeness of the
shoulders, and so be in danger of being suffocated in the
passage, as it has sometimes happened for want of care
therein. When the head is born, she may slide in her
fingers under the armpits, and the rest of the body will
follow without difficulty. As soon as the midwife hath in
this manner drawn forth the child, let her lay it on one
side, lest the blood and water which follow it
immediately should do it any injury, by running into its
mouth and nose, as it would do ii it lay on its back, and
so endanger the choking of it. The child being thus drawn
forth, the next thing requisite is to bring away the
after-burden; but before that, let the midwife be very
careful to examine whether there be any more children in
the womb, for sometimes a woman may have twins; of which
the midwife may satisfy herself both by the continuance
of the woman's throws and the bigness of her belly. But
this is not so certain as to put her hand up the passage;
and if so, she must have a care how she goes about the
after-birth, till the woman be delivered. The first
string must be cut and tied with a thread three or four
double, and the ends fastened with a string to the
woman's thigh to prevent the inconvenience it may cause
by hanging between the thighs.


     SECT. VI. Of the After-burden.

     UNTIL the after-burden is brought away, which
sometimes is more difficult to do than the child, and
altogether as dangerous, if it be not speedily done, the
woman cannot properly be said to be safely delivered,
though the child be born.

     Therefore, as soon as the child is born, before the
midwife either ties or cuts the navel string, lest the
womb should close, let her, having taken the string, wind
it once or twice about one or two of the fingers of the
left hand joined together, the better to hold it, with
which she may take single hold of it above the left, near
the privities, drawing likewise with that very gently,
resting a while, with the forefinger of the same hand
extending and stretching along the string towards the
entry of the Vagina, always observing for the more
facility to draw it from the side to which the burden
least inclines, for in so doing the rest will separate
the better; and extraordinary care must be taken that it
he not drawn forth with too much violence, lest in
breaking the string near the burden, the midwife be
obliged to put her whole hand into the womb to deliver
the woman; and she had need to take care in this matter,
that so the womb itself, to which sometimes this burden
is fastened very strongly, be not drawn away with it,
which has sometimes happens. It is therefore necessary to
assist nature with proper remedies, which are in general
whatever has been before mentioned, to cause a speedy
delivery: for whatever has magnetic virtue to bring away
the birth has the same to bring away the after-birth.
Besides which, the midwife ought to consider that the
good woman cannot but be much spent by the fatigue she
has already undergone in bringing forth the infant, and
therefore should be sure to take care to give her
something to comfort her. To which purpose some good
Jelly broths, and a little wine with a toast in it, and
other comforting things will be necessary. Sneezing being
conclusive to bring away the after-birth, let her take a
little white hellebore in powder to cause her to sneeze.
Tansy and the stone Ætites, applied as before directed,
is very efficacious in this. The smoke of marigold
flowers, received up a woman's privities by a funnel,
will bring away the after-birth, though the midwife has
lost her hold. Or if you boil mugwort in water till it be
very soft, and then take it out and apply it like a
poultice to the navel of the woman in travail, it
instantly brings away both the birth and after-birth; but
as soon as they are come forth, it must be instantly
taken away, lest it should bring away the womb also.



     SECT. VII. How to cut the Child's navel-string.

     AFTER the birth and after-birth are safely brought
away, the midwife ought to take care to cut the navel-
string; which though it be by some esteemed a thing of
small matter, yet it requires none of the least skill of
a midwife to do it with that care and prudence that it
ought. and therefore, to instruct the industrious midwife
a little therein. As soon as the child is come into the
world, let her consider whether it be weak or strong; and
if it be weak, let hear gently put back part of the vital
and natural blood in the body of the child, by the navel,
for that recruits a weak child, the vital and natural
spirits being communicated by the mother to the child by
its navel-string. But if the child be strong there is no
need of it. Only it will not be amiss to let the midwife
know, that many children that are born seemingly dead may
be brought to life again, if she squeeze six or seven
drops of blood out of that part of the navel-string which
is cut off, and give it the child inwardly.

     As to the cutting it short or long, authors can
scarce agree about it, nor midwives neither; some
prescribe it to be cut at four fingers breadth, which is
at the best an uncertain rule, unless all fingers were of
one size. 'Tis a received opinion, that the parts adapted
to generation are either contracted or dilated, according
to the cutting of the navel-string; which is the reason
that midwives are generally so kind to their own sex,
that they leave a longer part of the navel-string of a
male than the female, because they would hive the male
well provided for the encounters of Venus. And the reason
they give why they cut those more short is, because they
believe it makes them modest, and their parts narrower,
which makes them more acceptable to their husbands. But
whether this be so or not (which yet some of the greatest
searchers into the secrets of nature affirm for a truth)
yet certain it is that great care ought to be used about
cutting of the navel-string; and especially, that after
it is cut, it be not suffered to touch the ground, for if
it be, the child will never be able to hold its water,
but be subject all its lifetime to a diabetes, as
experience often confirms; but as to this manner of
cutting the navel-string, let the midwife take a brown
thread, three or four times double, of an ell long, or
thereabouts, tied with a single knot at each of the ends,
to prevent their entangling; and with this thread so
accommodated (which the midwife ought to have in
readiness before the woman's labour, as also a good pair
of scissors, that so no time may be lost), let her tie
the string within an inch of the belly with a double
knot, and, turning about the ends of the thread, let her
tie two or more on the side of the string, reiterating it
again, if it be necessary; then let her cut off the
navel-string another inch below the ligature towards the
afterbirth, so that there only remains but two inches of
the string, in the midst of which will be the knot spoken
of, which must be so straight knit as not to suffer a
drop of blood to squeeze out of the vessels, but yet care
must be taken not to knit it so straight as to cut in
two, and therefore the thread must he pretty thick and
pretty straight knit, it being better too straight than
too loose. Some children have miserably lost their lives,
before it hath been discovered that the navel-string was
not well tied. Therefore great care must be taken that no
blood squeeze through, for if there do, new knots must be
made with the rest of the string. You need not fear to
bind the navel-string very hard, because it is void of
sense; and that part of it which you leave on, falls off
of its own accord in a few days, ordinarily six or seven,
and sometimes in less time: but it is very rare that it
tarries longer than the eighth or ninth day.

     As soon as the navel-string is cut off, apply a
little cotton or lint to the place to keep it warm, lest
the cold enter into the body of the child, which it will
unavoidably do in case it be not bound hard enough; and
if the lint or cotton you apply to it be dipped in oil of
roses, it will be the better: then having put another
small rag, three or four times double, upon the belly of
the child, above the navel, lay the string so wrapped
upon it that it may touch the naked belly.

     Upon the top of all put another small bolster; and
then swathe it in a linen swathe, four fingers broad, to
keep it steady, lest by rolling too much, or being
continually stirred from side to side, it comes to fall
off, before the navel-string which you left remaining is
fallen off. 'Tis the usual custom of midwives to put a
piece of burnt rag to it; but I would advise them to put
a small quantity of bole armoniac, because of its drying
quality. Thus much may suffice as to cutting the navel-
string and delivery of a woman in labour, where the
labour is natural, and no ill accident happens. But it
sometimes so falls out, that the labour is not only hard
and difficult, but unnatural also, in which the midwife
must take other measures.


CHAPTER VII.
WHAT UNNATURAL LABOUR IS, AND WHENCE IT PROCEEDS; AND
WHAT THE MIDWIFE OUGHT TO DO IN SUCH CASES.


     SECT. I. What Unnatural Labour is.

     IT will be necessary to acquaint my readers that
there are three sorts of bad labour, all painful and
difficult, but not all properly unnatural, which are as
follows:

     The first is properly styled hard labour, and it is
that wherein the mother and child do suffer very much by
extreme pain.

     The second is difficult labour, which is thus
different from the former, that besides those extreme
pains, it is generally attended with some unhappy
accident, which, by retarding the birth, makes it very
difficult. Neither of those, though hard and difficult,
can be called unnatural; for women to bring forth
children in pain and sorrow is natural.

     'Tis therefore the third sort of labour which I call
unnatural and that is, when the child essays to come into
the world in a contrary position to that which nature
ordained.

     To explain this, the reader must know that there is
but one right and natural way of posture in which
children come to the birth; and that is, when the head
comes first, and the body follows after it in a straight
line. If, instead of this, the child comes with its feet
foremost, or with the side across, it is quite contrary
to nature, or, to speak more plainly, unnatural.


     SECT. II. Whence hard, difficult, and unnatural
Labour proceed.

     THE true physical reason why women in general bring
forth their children with so much pain is, that the sense
of feeling being distributed to the whole body by the
nerves, and the mouth of the womb being so straight, that
it must of necessity be dilated at the time of her
delivery; the dilating thereof stretcheth the nerves, and
from thence cometh the pain; some women having more pain
in their labour than others, proceeds from their having
the mouth of the matrix more full of nerves than others.

     Hard and difficult labour may proceed either from
the mother or child, or from both; it may proceed from
the mother by reason of a general indisposition of her
body; from the indisposition of some particular part
only, and that principally of the womb, which may be
affected with such a weakness as renders the mother
unable to expel her burden. It may be also because she is
too young, or she may be too old, and so may have the
passage too straight, and then, if it be her first child,
the parts may be too dry and hard, and cannot easily be
dilated. The cholic does also cause labour to be hard and
difficult, because it hinders the true pain which should
accelerate it. By which means, or which reason rather,
all great and acute pains render a woman's labour very
difficult. As when the woman is taken with a violent
fever, frequent convulsions, or a great flooding, or any
other violent distemper, especially when the membranes
are thick, and the orifice too straight, or the neck of
the womb not sufficiently opened.

     Hard labour may also proceed from the child; and
this is either when it happens to stick to a mole, or is
so weak it cannot break the membranes; also when it is
too big, either all over, or its head only; or if the
navel vessels should be twisted about its neck as when it
proves monstrous, or comes into the birth in an unnatural
posture. Sometimes it proceeds from the ignorance of the
midwife, who may hinder nature in her work.


     SECT. III. How the Midwife must proceed in order to
the Delivery of a Woman, in case of hard Labour and great
extremity.

     IN case the midwife finds a woman in difficult
labour, she must endeavour to know the particular
obstruction or cause thereof, that she may apply a
suitable remedy. When hard labour is caused by a woman's
being too young and too straight, the passages must be
anointed with oil, hog's lard, or fresh butter, to relax
and dilate them the easier. But if a woman be in years,
and has hard labour from her first child, let her lower
parts be anointed to mollify the inward orifice, which in
such case (being more hard and callous), does not easily
yield to the distension of labour: and indeed this is the
true cause why such women are longer in labour, and why
their children in their birth are more subject to bruises
than others. Those who are very lean, and have hard
labour from that cause, let them moisten their parts with
oil and ointments, to make them more smooth and slippery,
that the head of the infant in the womb may not be
compressed  and bruised by the hardness of the mother's
bones in its passage. But if the cause be weakness, she
ought to be strengthened, the better to enable her to
support her pain. Since difficult labour proceeds from
divers causes, the midwife must make use of several
remedies to women in hard difficult labour, which must be
adapted to the causes from whence in proceeds.

     I need not tell the judicious midwife that in cases
of extremity, when the labour is not only hard, but
difficult and dangerous, a far greater care must be had
than at other times. In such cases the situation of the
womb must be minded, and accordingly her posture of lying
must be regulated; which will be best across the bed,
being held by those that are of a good strength to
prevent her slipping down or moving herself during the
time of the operation. Then let her thighs be put asunder
as far as may be, and held so while her legs are bent
backwards towards her hips, her head leaning upon a
bolster, and the reins of her back supported in like
manner, her rump and buttocks being lifted up; observing
to cover her stomach, belly, and thighs with warm linen,
as well for decency's sake as to keep them from the cold.

     The woman being in this posture, let the midwife or
other operator put up her hand, and try if the neck of
the womb be dilated, and then remove the contracted blood
that obstructs the passage of the birth, and having
gently made way, let the operator tenderly move the
infant, having the head anointed with sweet butter, or
any harmless pomatum, and if the waters are not come down
they may be let forth without any difficulty. And if the
infant should attempt to break forth, not with the head
foremost nor across, he ought gently to turn it, that he
may find the feet; which having done, let him draw forth
one, and having fastened it to a ribbon, put it up again,
and finding the other, bring them as close as may be: let
the woman breathe between whiles, assisting nature what
she can by straining in bringing forward the birth, that
so he may more easily draw it forth; and that the
operator may do it the better, and his hold may be the
surer, he must fasten or wrap a linen cloth about the
child's thighs, observing to bring it into the world with
its feet downwards.

     But in case there be a flux of blood, let the
operator be well satisfied whether the child or the
secundine come first; for sometimes when the secundine
has come first, the mouth of the womb has been thereby
stopped, and the birth hindered, to the hazard both of
the woman and child; and therefore in this case the
secundine must be removed by a swift turn, and the child
sought for, and drawn forth, as has been directed.

     If upon enquiry it appears that the secundine comes
first, let the woman be delivered with all convenient
speed, because a great flux of blood wilt follow; for
then the veins are opened. And on this account two things
are to be minded; first, whether the secundine advances
forward much or little; if the former, and the head of
the child first appears, it must be directed to the neck
of the womb, as in the case of natural births; but if
there appears any difficulty in the delivery, the best
way is to search for the feet, and by them it may be put
by with a gentle hand, and the child taken out first; but
if the secundine is advanced, so that it cannot be  put
back, and the child follow it close, then the secundine
is to be taken out first with much care, and as swift as
may be, and laid aside, without cutting the entrail that
is fastened to them; for by that you may be guided to the
infant, which, whether it be alive or dead, must be drawn
forth by the feet as soon as possible; though this is not
to be done but in cases of great necessity, for the order
of nature is for the secundine to come last.


     SECT. IV. Of the Delivery of a Dead Child.

     IN delivering women of a dead child, the operator
ought to be certain that the child is dead, which may be
known by the falling of the mother's breast, the coldness
of her belly, the thickness of her urine, which is
attended with a stinking sediment at the bottom; and no
motion to be perceived in the child. Also when she turns
herself in her bed, the child sways like a lump of lead,
and her breath stinks though not used to do so. When the
operator is certain that the child is dead, let him or
her apply themselves to the saving of the mother, by
giving her those things that are most powerful in serving
nature in her operations. But if through weakness the
womb is not able to co-operate with nature, so that a
manual operation is absolutely necessary, let the
operator carefully observe the following directions,
viz., If the child be found dead with its head foremost,
he must take notice that the delivery will be the more
difficult, because in this case it is not only impossible
that the child should any ways assist in its delivery,
but the strength of the mother does also very much fail
her; and therefore the more sure and safest way for him
is to put up his left hand, sliding it as hollow in the
palm as he can, into the neck of the womb, into the lower
part thereof towards the feet, and then between the
infant and the neck of the matrix; and having a hook in
the right hand, couch it close ,and slip it above the
left hand, between the head of the child and the flat of
his hand, fixing it into the bone of the temple towards
the eye; or for want of convenient coming at that,
observe to keep the left hand in its place, gently moving
and stirring the head with it, and so with the right hand
hook draw the child forward, encouraging the woman to put
forth her utmost strength, and always drawing when the
woman's pains are upon her. The head being thus drawn
forth; the operator must with all speed slip his hand
under the armholes of the child, and take it forth,
giving immediately to the woman a toast of fine wheaten
bread in a quarter of a pint of tent, to revive and
cherish her spirits. By what I have already shown, the
midwife will know what to do in any other case that may
fall out, remembering that for a child to come head
foremost, and the body to follow in a straight line, is
the right posture for the child when it comes to the
birth: and if it comes any other way, it will be the
wisdom of the midwife, if possible, to bring it to this
posture; but if that cannot be done without very great
danger, then put it in a posture that it may be brought
forth by the feet. And if the midwife, perceiving in what
posture the child presents, or that the woman floods, or
any other accident happens, by which she finds it is not
in her power to deliver it, it will be best for her to
send for a man mid-wife in time, rather than put things
to the utmost extremity.


CHAPTER VIII.


     SECT. I. Directions for Child-bed Women after
Delivery.

     AFTER the birth and after-birth are brought away, if
the woman's body be very weak, keep her not too hot, for
extremity of heat weakens nature, and dissolves the
strength; but whether she be weak or strong, let no cold
air come near her, for cold gets into the spermatic
parts; and if cold gets into the womb it increases the
after-pains, causes swellings in the womb, and hurts the
nerves. Therefore, if a woman has had very hard labour,
'tis proper after delivery to wrap her in a skin of a
sheep, taken off as warm as possible, and putting the
fleshy side to her reins and belly; if a sheep skin
cannot well be had, the skin of a hare or rabbit, taken
off as soon as it is killed, may be applied to the same
parts; and by so doing the dilation made in the birth
will be closed up, and the melancholy blood expelled from
those parts; and these may be continued during the space
of an hour or two. After which, let the woman be swathed
with a fine linen cloth, about a quarter of a yard In
length, chafing her belly before it be swathed with the
oil of St. John's wort; afterwards raise up the matrix 
with a linen cloth, many times folded, then with a little
pillow or quilt cover her flank, place the swathe
somewhat above the haunches, winding it indifferently
stiff, applying at the same time a warm cloth to the
nipples. Care should be taken not to apply any remedy to
keep back the milk, because those remedies which drive
back the milk, being of a dissolving nature, it is
improper to apply them to the breast during such a
disorder, lest evil humours should be contracted in the
breast thereby: and therefore twelve hours at least ought
to be allowed for the circulation and settlement of the
blood.

     After the woman has been delivered some time you may
make a restrictive of the yolks of two eggs, a quarter of
a pint of white wine, oil of St. John's wort, oil of
roses, plantain, and rose water of each an ounce, mix
them together, fold a linen cloth and dip therein, warm
it before a gentle fire and apply it to the breasts, and
the pain of those parts will be greatly eased.

     But be sure not to let her sleep soon after her
delivery, but let her take some broth or caudle, or any
other liquid matter that is nourishing, about four hours
after delivery, and then she may be safely permitted to
sleep, if she is so disposed, as 'tis probable she will
be, being tired with the fatigue of her labour. But
before this, as soon as she is laid in her bed, let her
drink a draught of burnt white wine, in which melt a dram
of spermaceti. Let her also avoid the light for the first
three days; for labour weakens the eyesight. The herb
vervain is of singular service to the sight,  and may be
used in any way, either boiled in her meats or drink, not
having the least offensive taste, but many pleasant
virtues. If she should be feverish, add the leaves or
roots of plantain to it; but if her courses come not away
as they ought, let the plantain alone, and instead
thereof put mother of thyme. If the womb is  foul, which
may be known by the impurity of the blood, and its
stinking and coming away in clotted lumps, or if you
suspect any of the after-birth to be left behind, which
may sometimes happen, though the midwife be ever so
careful and skilled, then make her a drink of featherfew,
pennyroyal, mother of thyme, boiled in white wine, and
sweetened with sugar: panada and new laid eggs are the
best meat for her at first; of which let her eat often
and but a little at a time. And let her use cinnamon in
all her meats and drinks, for it mightily strengthens the
womb; let her stir very little for six or seven days
after her delivery: and let her talk as little as may be,
for that weakens her. If she goes not well to stool give
her a clyster made with the decoction of mallows, and a
little brown sugar. After she hath lain in a week, or
something more, give her such things as close the womb;
to which you may add a little polypodum, both leaves and
roots bruised, which will purge gently: this is as much
in cases of natural birth as needs at first be done.


     SECT. II.  In extremity of unnatural Labour.

     LET the woman be sure to keep a temperate diet: and
take care that she does by no means overcharge herself,
after such an excessive evacuation, not being' ruled by
or giving credit to unskilled nurses, who are apt to
admonish them to feed heartily, the better to repair the
loss of blood; for the blood is not for the most part
pure, but such as has been detained in the vessels or
membranes, and it is better voided for the health of a
woman than kept, unless there happens an extraordinary
flux of blood: for if her nourishment be too much, it may
make her liable to a fever, and increase the milk to a
superfluity, which may he of dangerous consequence. It is
therefore requisite for the first five days especially,
that she takes moderately panada, broth, poached eggs,
jelly of chickens and of calves feet, and French barley
broth, each day somewhat increasing the quantity. And if
she intend to be nurse to her child, she may take a
little more than ordinary to increase the milk by
degrees: which must be of no continuance, but drawn off
either by the child or otherwise. In that case likewise
let her have coriander or fennel-seed boiled in her
barley broth; and by that means, for the time before
mentioned, let her abstain from meat. If no fever trouble
her she may drink now and then a small quantity of white
wine or claret, as also syrup of maidenhair, or any other
syrup that is of an astringent quality, taking it in a
little water well boiled. And after the fear of a fever
or contraction of humour to the breast is over, she may
then be nourished more plentifully with the broths of
pullets, capons, pigeons, partridges, mutton, veal, etc.,
which must not be till after eight days at least from the
time of the delivery; for by that time the womb will have
purged itself, unless some intervening accident should
hinder. It will then be expedient to give her cold meats,
so it be done sparingly, the better to gather strength;
and let her during the time rest quietly, and free from
any disturbance, not sleeping in the day time if she can
avoid it. If there happens any obstructions in the
evacuation of excrements, the following clyster may be
administered: Take pelitory of the wail, and of both the
mallows, of each a handful, fennel and aniseed of each
two ounces, boil them in the decoction of a sheep's head,
and take of this three quarters, dissolving it in common
honey and coarse sugar, and of new fresh butter two
ounces; strain it well, and administer it clyster-wise.
But it this does not operate to your mind, then you may
take an ounce of catholicon.


CHAPTER IX.
OF A MOLE, OR FALSE CONCEPTION; AND OF MONSTERS, AND
MONSTROUS BIRTHS, WITH THE REASON THEREOF.


     SECT. I. Of a Mole, or False Conception.

     A MOLE or false conception is nothing else but a
mass or great lump of flesh burdening the womb. It is an
inarticulate piece of flesh without any form, and
therefore, differs from monsters, which are both formata
and articulata: and then it is said not to be a
conception, but a false one; which puts a difference
between a true conception and a mole; and the difference
holds good three different ways: First, in the genus,
because a mole cannot be said to be an animal. Secondly,
it differs in species, because it hath no human figure,
and bears not the character of a man. Thirdly, it differs
in the individuum, for it hath no affinity with the parts
of that in the whole body, or any particles of the same.

     There are variety of judgments among authors about
the producing cause of this effect, some affirming that
it is produced by the woman's seed going into the womb
without a man's; but because we have before proved that
women have properly no seed at all, but only an Ovalium,
which is fcundated by the active principle of the man's
seed, this opinion needs no confutation. Others say it is
engendered of the menstruous blood; but should this be 
granted, it would follow that maids, by having their
courses stopped, might be subject to the same, which
never any yet were. The true cause of this carnous
conception, which we call a Mole, proceeds both from the
man and woman, from corrupt and barren seed in the man,
and from the menstruous blood in the woman , both mixed
together in the cavity of the womb; and nature, finding
herself weak (yet desirous of maintaining the perpetuity
of her species) labours to bring forth a vicious
conception rather than none; and not being able to bring
forth a living creature, generates a piece of flesh.

     This imperfect conception may be known to be such by
the following signs. The monthly courses are suppressed,
the belly is puffed up and also waxed hard, the breath
smells, and the appetite is depraved. But you will say,
these are signs of a breeding Woman in true conception,
and therefore these cannot distinguish a mole. To this I
answer, Though thus they agree, yet they are different in
several respects: for a mole may be felt in the womb
before the third month, which an infant cannot: nor in
the motion of the mole the effects of a sensitive power
therein, but only caused by the faculty of the womb, and
of the seminal spirit diffused through the substance of a
mole; for though it has no animal, yet it has a vegetable
life; and then the belly is suddenly swelled where there
is a mole. In true conception the belly is first
contracted and then riseth gradually. Another difference
is, the belly being pressed with the hand, the mole gives
way, and the hand being taken away it returns to the
place again: but a child in the womb, though pressed with
the hand, moves not presently, and being removed, returns
not at all, or at least very slowly. But, (to name no
more) another very material difference is, that a child
continues not in the womb above eleven months at most;
but a mole sometimes continues for four or five years,
sometimes more and sometimes less, according to its being
fastened to the matrix: for sometimes it has so fallen
out that the mole falls away in four or five months; and
if it remains until the eleventh month, the legs are
feeble, and the whole body appears in a wasting
condition, or the belly swells bigger and bigger, which
is the reason that some who are thus afflicted think they
are hydroptical, though it be no such thing; which a
woman easily knows, if she will but consider that in a
dropsy the legs will swell and grow big; in cases of a
male they consume and wither. This distemper is an enemy
to true conception, and of dangerous consequence; for a
woman that breeds a mole is every way more inconvenienced
than a woman that is with child, and all the while she
keeps it she lives in danger of her life.

     The cure of this distemper consists chiefly in
expelling it as soon as may be; for the longer it is kept
the worse it is: and this many times cannot be affected
without manual operation; but that being the last remedy,
all other means ought to be first used. Amongst which,
Phlebotomy ought not to be omitted; for seeing letting of
blood causeth Abortion, by reason it takes away that
nourishment. that should sustain the life of the child,
why may not this vicious conception be by the same means
deprived of that vegetative sap by which it lives? To
which end open the liver vein, and then the Saphena in
both feet; fasten the cupping glasses to the loins and
sides of the belly: which done, let the urinary part be
first mollified, and the expulsive faculty be provoked to
expel the burden. And to loosen the ligatures of the
mole, take mallows with roots, three handfuls; pelitory,
camomile, violet leaves, melilot roots, of fennel,
parsley, mercury, of each two handfuls; fenugreek and
linseed, of each One pound: boil them in water and make a
bath thereof, and let her sit therein up to the navel. At
her going out of the bath let her reins and privities be
anointed with this unguent: take ammoniac, laudani, fresh
butter of each an ounce: and with oil of linseed make an
ointment; or instead of this may be used unguentum
agrippæ or dialthæ. Also take aq. bryon. composit., roots
of althæ and mercury, of each a handful: linseed and
barley meal, of each six ounces; boil all these with
water and honey, and make a plaster: and the ligaments of
the mole being thus loosened, let the expulsive faculty
be stirred up to expel the mole: for the effecting of
which all those medicaments are very proper which bring
down the courses. Therefore take savine, madder,
valerian, horehound, sage, hyssop, betony, pennyroyal,
calamint, hypericon, and with water make a decoction, and
give three ounces of it with an ounce and a half of syrup
of featherfew. But if these remedies prove not available,
then must the mole be drawn away by manual operation, in
the manner following: let the operator (having placed the
woman in a proper posture, as has been directed in cases
of unnatural labour) slide his hand into the womb, and
with it draw forth the mole; but if it be grown so big
that it cannot be drawn away whole (which is very rare,
because it is a soft tender body, and much more pliable
than a child), let the operator bring it away by parts,
by using a crochet or knife, if it cannot be done
otherwise. And if the operator finds it is joined and
fastened to the womb, he must gently separate it with his
finger ends, his nails being pared, putting them by
little and little between the mole and the womb;
beginning on the side where it does stick fast, and so
pursue it till it be quite loosened, taking great care if
it grows too fast not to rend or hurt the proper
substance of the womb, proceeding as in the case of an
after-burden, that stays behind the womb when the string
is broken off: but a mole has never any string fastened
to it, nor any burden, from when it should receive any
nourishment, but does of itself immediately draw it from
the vessels of the womb. And thus much shall suffice to
be said concerning a mole: of which I have shown the
cause, the signs, and the cure.


     SECT. II: Of Monsters, and monstrous Births.

     MONSTERS are properly depraved conceptions, and are
deemed by the ancients to be excursions of nature, and
are always vicious either by figure, situation,
magnitude, or number.

     They are vicious in Figure, when a man bears the
character of a beast; they are vicious in magnitude, when
the parts are not equal, or that one part is bigger than
the other; and this is a thing very common, by reason of
some excrescence. They are vicious in situation many
ways, as if the ears were on the face, or the eyes on the
breasts or on the legs, as were seen in a monster born at
Ravenna, in Italy, in the year 1570. And lastly, they
are, vicious in number when a man hath two heads, four
hands, and two bodies joined, which was the case of the
monster born at Zarzara, in the year 1550.

     As to the cause of their generation, it is either
divine or natural.  The divine cause proceeds from the
permissive will of the great author of our being
suffering parents to bring forth such deformed monsters,
as a punishment for their filthy and corrupt affections,
which is let loose unto wickedness, like brute beasts
that have no understanding: for which reason the ancient
Romans enacted, that those who were deformed should not
be put into religious houses.
<Illustration: A boy with wings instead of arms>
arist1.jpg
 And St. Jerome, in his time, grieved to see the deformed
and lame offered up to God in religious houses; and
Kecherman, by way of inference, excluded all that were
misshapen, because deformity of body is often a sign of
the pollution of the heart, as a curse laid upon the
child for the incontinency of the parents. Yet there are
many born depraved, which ought not to be ascribed to the
infirmity of the parents. Let us therefore search out the
natural cause of their generation, which, according to
the ancients, who dived into the secrets of nature, is
either in the matter or the agent, in the seed, or in the
womb. The matter may be in fault two ways, by defect or
by excess. By defect when the child hath but one arm or
leg, etc.; by excess, when it has three hands or two
heads. Some monsters are also begotten by women's bestial
and unnatural coition, as in the year 1608 there was a
monster begotten by a woman's generating with a dog.
<Illustration: A woman with the legs and tail of a dog>
arist2.jpg
The agent or womb may be in fault three ways: First, in
the forming faculty, which may be too strong or too weak,
by which a depraved figure is sometimes produced.
Secondly, the instrument, or place of conception; the
evil confirmation, or evil disposition whereof will cause
a monstrous birth. And thirdly, the imaginative power at
the time of conception, which is of such force that it
stamps a character of the imagined upon the child so that
the child, or the children of an adulteress, by the
mother's imaginative power, may have the nearest
resemblance to her own husband, though begotten by any
other man. And through this power of imaginative faculty
it was that a woman, at the time of conception, beholding
the picture of a black-a-moor, conceived and brought
forth a child, resembling an Ethiopian. And that this
power of the imagination was well enough known to the
ancients, is evident by the example of Jacob, the father
of the twelve tribes of israel, who having agreed with
his father-in-law to have all the spotted sheep for the
keeping of his flock, to increase his wages took hazel
rods, peeling them with white streaks in them, and laid
them before the sheep when they came to drink, and they
coupling together, whilst they beheld the rods, conceived
and brought forth spotted young. Nor does the imagination
work on the child at the time of the conception only, but
afterwards also, as was seen in the example of a worthy
gentlewoman, who being big with child, and passing by a
butcher killing meat, a drop of blood spurted on her
face; whereupon she presently said that the child would
have some blemish on his face which proved true, for at
the birth it was found marked with a red spot.

     But besides the way mentioned, monsters are
sometimes produced by other means; to wit, by the undue
coition of a man and his wife when her monthly flowings
are upon her; which being a thing against nature, no
wonder that it should produce an unnatural issue. If,
therefore, a man's desire be ever so great for coition
(as sometimes it is after long absence) yet if a woman
knows that the custom of women is upon her, she ought not
to admit of any embraces, which at that time are both
unclean and unnatural. The issue of these unclean
embraces proving often monstrous, as a just punishment
for such turpidinous action. Or if they should not always
produce monstrous births, yet are dull, heavy, sluggish,
and defective in the understanding, wanting the vivacity
and liveliness which those children who are begotten when
women are free from their courses are endued with.

     There has been some contending among authors, to
know whether those who are born monsters have reasonable
souls, some affirming and others denying it; the result
of both sides at last coming to this, that those who,
according to the order of nature, are descended from our
first parents by the coition of a man or woman, though
their outward shape be deformed and monstrous, have
notwithstanding reasonable souls; by those monsters that
are not begotten by man, but are the product of a woman's
unnatural lust, and copulating with other creatures,
shall perish as the brute beasts by whom they were
begotten, not having a reasonable soul. The same being
also true of imperfect and abortive births.  There are
some of opinion that monsters may be engendered by
infernal spirits; but notwithstanding Ægidius Faoius
pretended to believe it with respect to a deformed
monster, barn at Cracovia; and Hieronimus Carmanus
writeth of a maid that was got with child by the devil.
Being of a wicked spirit, and not capable of having human
seed, how is it possible he should beget a human
creature? If they say that the devil may assume to
himself a dead body, and enliven the faculties of it and
thereby make it able to generate, I answer, that though
we suppose this could be done, which I believe not, yet
that body must bear the image of the devil, and it
borders upon blasphemy to think that the all-wise and
good Being would so far give way to the worst of spirits
as to suffer him to raise up his diabolical offspring:
for in the school of nature we are taught the contrary:
that like begets like; whence it follows that a man can
not be born a devil.

     The first I shall present is a most frightful
monster indeed, representing an hairy child. It was
covered over with hair like a beast. That which rendered
it yet more frightful was, that its navel was in the
place where its nose should stand, and his eyes placed
where his mouth should have been, and its month was in
the chin. It of the male kind, and born in France in the
year 1597. Thus:
<Illustration: the hairy child> arist3.jpg

     A boy was born in Germany with one head and one
body, but having four ears, four arms, four thighs, four
legs, and four feet. This birth the learned, who beheld
it, judged to proceed from the redundance of the seed;
but there not being enough for twins nature formed what
she could, and so made the most of it. This child lived
some years, and though he had four feet, he knew not how
to go; by which we may see the wisdom of nature, rather
the good of nature, in the formation of the body of man.
<Illustration> arist4.jpg

     In the time of Henry III. a woman was delivered of
child, having two heads and four arms, and the rest was a
twin under the navel: and then beneath all the rest was
single, as appears in the figure.
<Illustration> arist5.jpg
The heads were so placed that they looked contrary ways,
and each had two distinct arms and hands: they would both
laugh, both speak, and both cry, and eat and be hungry
together. Sometimes the one would speak, and the other
would keep silence, and sometimes both would speak
together. It was of the female sex, and though it had two
mouths, and did eat with both, yet there was but one
fundament to disburden nature. It lived several years,
but the one outlived the other three years, carrying the
dead one (for there was no parting them), till the other
fainted with the burden, and more with the stink of the
dead carcase.

     A child was born in Flanders which had two heads and
four arms, seeming like two girls joined together, having
two of their arms lifted up between and above their
heads;
<Illustration> arist6.jpg
the thighs being placed as it were cross one another,
according to the figure. How long they lived I had no
account of.

     By this figure
<Illustration: A man with no arms holding a stick with
his foot> arist7.jpg
you will see that although the arms are missing yet they
are supplied by other members.
Nature to us sometimes does Monsters show,
That we by them may our own mercies know;
And thereby sin's deformity may see
Than which there's nothing can more monstrous be.


THE EXPERIENCED MIDWIFE
PART I.
A GUIDE FOR CHILD-BEARING WOMEN.

THE INTRODUCTION.


     I have given this book the title of The Complete and
Experienced Midwife, both because it is chiefly designed
for those that profess midwifery, and contains whatever
is necessary for them to know in the practice thereof,
and also because it is the result of many years'
experience, and that in the most difficult cases, and is
therefore the more to be depended upon. A midwife is the
most necessary and honourable office, being indeed a
helper of nature; which therefore makes it necessary for
her to be well acquainted with all the operations of
nature in the work of generation, and instruments with
which she works; for she that knows not the operations of
nature, nor with what tools she works, must needs be at a
loss how to assist therein. And seeing the instruments of
operation both in men and women are those things by which
mankind is produced, it is very necessary that all
midwives should be well acquainted with them, that they
may the better understand their business, and assist
nature as there shall be occasion. The first thing then
necessary as introductory to this treatise, is an
ANATOMICAL DESCRIPTION of the several parts of generation
both in men and women; and having designed throughout to
comprehend much in a little room, I shall avoid all
unnecessary and impertinent matters with which books of
this nature are for the most part clogged, and which are
more curious than needful. And though I shall be
necessitated to speak plainly, that so I may be
understood, yet I shall do it with that modesty that none
shall have need to blush, unless it be from something in
themselves, rather than from what they shall find here;
having the motto of the royal garter for my defence,
which is, "Honi soit qui mal y pense." Evil to him that
evil thinks.


CHAPTER I.
AN ANATOMICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF
GENERATION BOTH IN MAN AND WOMAN.


     SECT. I. Of the Parts of Generation in Man.

     As the generation of mankind is produced by the
coition of both sexes, it necessarily follows that the
instruments of generation are of two sorts, viz., male 
and female; the operations of which are by action and
passion; and herein the agent is the seed, and the
patient blood; whence we may easily collect, that the
body of man being generated by action and passion, he
must needs be subject thereunto during his life. Now,
since the instruments of generation are male and female,
it will be necessary to treat of them both distinctly,
that the honest and discreet midwife may be well
acquainted with their several parts, and their various
operations, as they contribute to the work of generation.
And, in doing this, I shall give the honour of precedence
to my own sex, and speak first of the parts of generation
in man, which will be comprehended under six particulars,
viz., The preparing vessels, the corpus varicosum, the
testicles, or stones, the vasa deferentia, the seminal
vessels, and the yard. Of each of which in their order.

     I.-- The first are the vasa preparentia, or
preparing vessels, which are in number four, two veins,
and as many arteries; and they are called preparing
vessels from their office, which is to prepare that
matter or substance which the stones turn into seed to
fit it for the work. Whence you may note, that the liver
is the original of blood, and distributes it through the
body by the veins and not the heart, as some have taught.
As to the original of these veins, the right vein
proceedeth from the vena cava, or great vein, which
receives the blood from the liver, and distributes it by
its branches to all the body; the left is from the
emulgent vein, which is one of the two main branches of
the hollow vein passing to the reins. As to the arteries,
they both arise from the great artery, which the Greeks
call that which is indeed the great trunk and original of
all the arteries. But I will not trouble you with Greek
derivations of words, affecting more to teach you the
knowledge of things than words.

     2.-- The next thing to be spoken of is the corpus
varicosum, this is an interweaving of the veins and
arteries which carry the vital and natural blood to the
stones to make seed of. These, though at their first
descension they keep at a small distance the one from the
other, yet before they enter the stones they make an
admirable intermixture of twisting the one from the
other, so that sometimes the veins go into the arteries,
and sometimes the arteries into the veins; the substance
of which is very hard and long, not much unlike a pyramid
in fort, without any sensible hollowness: The use is to
make one body of the blood and vital sprits, which they
both mix and change the colour of from red to white, that
so the stones may both have a fit matter to work upon,
and do their work more easily; for which reason, the 
interweaving reacheth down to the very stones, and
pierceth in their substance.

     3.-- The stones are the third thing to be spoken of,
called also testicles; in Latin Teste, that is, a
witness, because they witness one to be a man. As to
these I need not tell you their number, nor where nature
has placed them, for that is obvious to the eye. Their
substance is soft, white, and spongy, full of small veins
and arteries, which is the reason they swell to such
bigness upon the flowing down of the humour in them.
Their form is oval; but most authors are of opinion that
their bigness is not equal, but that the right is the
biggest, the hottest, and breeds the best and strongest
seed. Each of these stones hath a muscle, called
cremaster, which signifies to hold up, because they pull
up the stones in the act of coition, that so the vessels
being slackened may the better void the seed. These
muscles are weakened both by age and sickness; and then
the stones hang down lower than in youth and health.
These stones are of great use, for they convert the blood
and vital spirits into seed for the procreation of man;
but this must not be understood as if they converted all
the blood that comes into them into seed, for they keep
some for their own nourishment. But besides this, they
add strength and courage to the body; which is evident
from this, that eunuchs are neither so hot, strong, nor
valiant, as other men, nor is an ox so hot or valiant as
a bull.

     4.-- The next in order are the vasa deferentia,
which are the vessels that carry the seed from the stones
to the seminal vessels, which is kept there till its
expulsion. These are in number two, in colour white, and
in substance nervous or sinewy; and from certain 
hollowness which they have in them are also called
spermatic spores. They rise not far from the preparing
vessels; and when they come into the cavity of the belly,
they turn back again, and pass into the backside of the
bladder, between it and the right gut; and when they come
near the neck of the bladder they are joined to the
seminal galls, which somewhat resemble the cells of an
honey-comb; which cells contain an oily substance, for
they draw the fatty substance from the seed, which they
empty into the urinal passage, which is done for the most
part in the act of copulation, that so the thin internal
skin of the yard suffers not through the acrimony or
sharpness of the seed. And when the vasa deferentia has
passed, as before declared, they fall into the glandula
prostrata, which are the vessels by nature ordained to
keep the seed, and with are next to be spoken of.

     5.-- The seminal vessels, called glandulum seminal,
are certain kernels placed between the neck of the
bladder and the right gut, composing about the vasa
deferentia, the urethra. or common passage for seed and
urine, passing through the midst of it, and may properly
enough be Sled the conduit of the yard. At the mouth of
the urethra, where it meets with the vasa deferentia,
there is a thick skin, whose office is to hinder the
seminal vessels, which are of a spongy nature, from
shedding their seed against their will; this skin is very
full of pores, and through the heat of the act of
copulation the pores open, and so give passage to the
seed, which being of a very subtile spirit, and
especially being moved, will pass through this caruncle
or skin as quicksilver through a leather; and yet the
pores of skin are not discernible unless In the anatomy
of a man who had some violent running in the reins when
he died, and then they are conspicuous, those vessels
being the proper seat of that disease.

     6.-- The last of the parts of generation in man to
be spoken of is the yard, which has a principal share in
the work of generation, and is called Penis, from its
hanging without the belly; and it consists of skin,
tendons, veins, arteries, sinews, and great ligaments,
and is long and round, being ordained by nature both for
the passage of the urine, and for the conveying of the
seed into the matrix. It has some parts common with it to
the rest of the body , as the skin, o the Membrana
Carnosa; and some parts of it has peculiar to itself, as
the two nervous bodies the Septum, the Urethra, the
Glans, the four muscles, and the vessels. The skin, which
the Latins called Cutus, is full of pores, through which
the sweet and suligmous or sooty black vapours of the
third concoction (which concocts the blood into flesh)
pass out. These pores are very many and thick, but hardly
visible to the eye; and when the yard stands not, it is
sluggy; but when it stands, it is stiff. The skin is very
sensible, because the nerves concur to make up its being;
for the brain gives sense to the body by the nerves. As
to the Carnus Membrana, or fleshy skin, it is so called
not because its body is fleshy, but because it lies
between the flesh and passeth in other parts of the body
underneath the fat, and sticks close to the muscles; but
in the yard there is no fat at all, only a few
superficial veins and arteries pass between the former
skin and this, which when the yard stands are visible to
the eye. These are the parts common both to the yard and
to the rest of the body. I will now weak of those parts
of the yard which are peculiar to itself, and to no other
parts of the body: And those are likewise six, as has
been already said, of which it Will also be necessary to
speak particularly. And,

     1.-- Of the Nervous Bodies: Those are two, though
joined together, and are hard, long, and sinewy; they are
spongy within, and full of black blood: the spongy
substance of the inward part of it seems to be woven
together like a net, consisting of innumerable twigs of
veins and arteries. The black blood contained therein is
very full of spirits, and the delights or desire of Venus
add heat to these; which causeth the yard to stand; and
that is the reason that both venereal sights and tales
will do it. Nor need it be strange to any, that Venus,
being a planet cold and moist, should add heat to those
parts, since by night, as the Psalmist testifies, psalm
cxxi., 9. Now this hollow, spongy intermixture or weaving
was so ordered by nature, on purpose to contain the
spirit of venereal heat, that the yard may not fail
before it has done its work. These two side-ligaments of
the yard, where they are thick and round, arise from the
lower part of the share-bone, and at the beginning are
separated the one from the other, resembling a pair of
horns, or the letter Y, where the Urethra, or passage of
urine and seed, passeth between them.

     2.--Those nervous bodies of which I have spoken, so
soon as they come to the joining of the share-bone, are
joined by the Sceptum Lucium, which is the second
internal part to be described, which in substance is
white and nervous, or sinewy, and its use is to uphold
the two side-ligaments and the Urethra.

     3.-- The third thing in the internal parts of the 
yard is the Urethra, which is the passage or channel by
which both the seed and urine are conveyed out through
the yard. The substance of it is sinewy, think, soft, and
loose, as the side-ligaments are; it begins at the neck
of the bladder, and, being joined to it, passeth to the
Glans. It has in the beginning of it three holes, of
which the largest of them is in the midst, which receives
the urine into it; the other two are smaller, by which it
receives the seed from each seminal vessel.

     4.-- The yard has four muscles, on each side two;
these muscles are instruments of voluntary motion,
without which no part of the body can move itself. It
consists of fibrous flesh to make its body, of nerves for
its sense, of veins for its nourishment, of arteries for
its vital heat, of a membrane or skin to knit it together
and to distinguish one muscle from another, and all them
from the flesh: Of these muscles, as I said before, the
yard has two on each side, and the use of them is to 
erect the yard and make it stand, and therefore are they
also called Erectores. But here you must note, that of
the two on each side, the one is shorter and thicker than
the other, and these are they that do erect the yard, and
so are called Erectores; the other two are longer and
smaller, their office is to dilate the lower part of the
Urethra, both for making water and emitting the seed;
upon which account they are called Accelerators.

     5.-- That which is called the Glans, is the extreme 
part of the yard, which is very soft, and of a most
exquisite feeling, by reason of the thinness of the skin
wherewith it is covered: This is covered with the
praeputium, or foreskin, which in some men  covers the
top of the yard quite close, but in others it doth not; 
which skin moving up and down in the act of copulation,
brings pleasure both to man and woman. This outer skin is
that which the Jews were commanded to cut off on the
eighth day. This praeputium, or fore-skin, is tied to the
Glans by a ligament or bridle, which is called Fraenum.

     6.-- The last internal part of the yard are the
vessels thereof, veins nerves and arteries. Of these some
pass by the skin, and are visible to the eye when the
yard stands; others pass by the inward parts of the yard;
the arteries are wonderfully dispersed through the body
of the yard, much exceeding the dispersion of the veins;
for the right artery is dispersed to the left side, and
the left to the right side. It hath two nerves, the
lesser whereof is bestowed upon the skin, the greater
upon the muscles and body of the yard. But this much
shall suffice to be said in describing the parts of
generation in men: And shall therefore, in the next
place, proceed to describe those of women, that so the
honest and industrious midwife may know how to help them
in their extremities.


     SECT. II. Describing the Parts of Generation in
Women.

     WHATEVER ignorant person may imagine, or some good
women  think, they are unwilling those private parts,
which nature has given them, should be exposed, yet it is
in this case absolutely necessary; for I do positively
affirm that it is impossible truly to apprehend what a
midwife ought to do, if these parts are not perfectly
understood by them; nor do I know any reason they have to
be ashamed to see or hear a particular description of
what God and nature has given them, since it is not the
having these parts, but the unlawful use of them, that
causes shame.

     To proceed then in this description more regularly,
I shalt speak in order of these following principal
parts: 1st, Of the Privy Passage; 2ndly, Of the Womb;
3rdly, Of the Testicles, or Stones; 4thly, Of the
Spermatic Vessels.

     1st. Of the Privy Passage. Under this head I shall
consider the six following parts:

     1. The Lips, which are visible to the eye, and are
designed by nature as a cover to the Fissura Magna, or
great orifice: These are framed of the body, and have
pretty store of spongy fat; and their use is to keep the
internal parts from cold and dust. These are the only
things that are obvious to the sight; the rest are
concealed, and cannot be seen unless these two tips are
stretched asunder and the entry of the privities opened.

     2. When the lips are severed, the next thing that
appears is the Nymphae, or wings; they are formed of soft
and spongy flesh, and are in form and colour like the
comb of a cock.

     3. In the uppermost part, just above the urinary
passage, may be observed the Clitoris, which is a sinewy
and hard body, full of spongy and black matter within,
like the side ligament of the yard, representing in form
the yard of a man, and suffers erection and falling as
that doth; and it grows hard and becomes erected as a
man's yard, in proportion to the desire a woman hath in
copulation; and this desire also is that which gives a
woman delight in copulation; for without this a woman
hath neither a desire to copulation and delight in it,
nor can she conceive by it. And I have heard that some
women have had their Clitoris so long that they have
abused other women therewith: Nay, some have gone so far
as too say that those persons that have been reported to
be Hermaphrodites, as having the genitals both of men and
women, are only such women to whom the Clitoris hangs out
externally, resembling the form of a yard. But though I
will not be positive in this, yet it is certain, that the
larger the Clitoris is in any woman the more fruitful she
is.

     4. Under the Clitoris and above the neck, appears
the Orifice, or urinary passage, which is much larger in
women than men, and causes their water to come from them
in a great stream. On both sides the urinary passage may
be seen two small membranous appendices, a little broader
above than below, issuing forth of the inward parts of
the great lips, immediately under the Clitoris; the use
whereof is to cover the orifice of the urine, and defend
the bladder from the cold air; so that when a woman
pisseth, she contracts herself so, that she conducts out
the urine without suffering it to spread along the
privities, and often without so much as wetting the lips;
and therefore these small membranous wings are called the
Nymphae, because they govern the woman's water. Some
women have them so great and long, that they have been
necessitated to cut off so much as has exceeded and grew
without the lips.

     5. Near this are four Caruncles, or fleshy knobs,
commonly called Caruncles Myrtiformes; these are placed
on each side two, and a small one above, just under the
urinary passage, and in virgins are reddish, plump, and
round, but hang flagging when virginity is lost. In
virgins they are joined together by thin and sinewy skin 
or membrane, which is calls the Hymen, and keeps them in
subjection, and makes them resemble a kind of rose-bud
half blown. This disposition of the Caruncles is the only
certain mark of virginity, it being in vain to search for
it elsewhere, or hope to be informed of it any other way.
And 'tis from the passing and bruising these Caruncles,
and forcing and breaking the little membranes (which is
done by the yard in the first act of copulation), that
there happens an effusion of blood; after which they
remain separated, and never recover their first figure,
but become more and more flat as the acts of copulation
are increased; and in those that have children they are
almost totally deseated, by reason of the great
distension these parts suffer in the time of their
labour. Their use is to straighten the neck of the womb,
to hinder the cold air from incommoding it, and likewise
to increase mutual pleasure in the act of coition; for
the caruncles being then extremely swelled and filled
with blood and spirits, they close with more pleasure
upon the yard of the man, whereby the woman is much more
delighted. What I have said of the effusion of blood
which happens in the first act of copulation, though when
it happens it is an undoubted sign of virginity, showing
the Caruncles Myrtiformes have never been pressed till
then, yet when there happens no blood, it is not always a
sign that virginity is lost before; for the Hymen may be
broken without copulation by the defluction of sharp
humours, which sometimes happens to young virgins,
because in them it is thinnest. It is also done by the
unskilful applying of bestaries to provoke the terms,
etc. But these things happen so rarely, that those
virgins to whom it so happens do thereby bring themselves
under a just suspicion.

     6. There is next to be spoken of the neck of the
womb, which is nothing else but the distance between the
privy passage and the mouth of the womb, into which the
man's yard enters in the act of copulation: and in women
of reasonable stature is about eight inches in length.
'Tis of a membranous substance, fleshy without, skinny
and very much wrinkled within; that it both may retain
the seed cast into it in the act of copulation, and also
that it may dilate and extend: itself to give sufficient
passage to the infant at its birth. it is composed of two
membranes, the innermost of them being white, nervous,
and circularly wrinkled, much like the palate of an ox,
that so it might either contract or dilate itself
according to the bigness or length of the man's yard; and
to the end that, by the collision, or squeezing, or
pressing made by the yard in copulation, the pleasures
may be naturally augmented. The external or outmost
membrane is red and fleshy like the muscle of the
Fundament, surrounding the first, to the end the yard may
the better be closed within it; and it is by means of
this membrane that the next adheres the stronger both to
the bladder  and the right guts. The internal membrane in
young girls is very soft and delicate, but in women much
addicted to copulation it grows harder; and in those that
are grown aged, if they have been given much to venery,
it is almost become grisly

     2ndly, Having spoken of the privy passage, I come
now to speak of the Womb, which the Latins call Matrix,
yet the only English word is the womb. Its parts are two;
the mouth of the womb and the bottom of it. The mouth is
an orifice at the entrance into it, which may be dilated
and shut together like a purse; for although in the act
of copulation it be big enough to receive the glans of
the yard, yet after conception it is so close and shut,
that it will not admit of the point of a bodkin to enter;
and yet again at the time of the woman's delivery it is
opened so extraordinary that the infant passeth through
it into the world at which time this orifice wholly
disappears, and the womb seems to have but one great
cavity, from its bottom to the very entrance of the neck.
When a woman is not with child it is a little oblong, and
of substance very thick and close; but when she is with
child it is shortened, and its thickness diminisheth
proportionably to its distension. And therefore it is a
mistake of some anatomists to affirm, that its substance
waxeth thicker a little before a woman's labour; for any
one's reason will inform them, that the more distended it
is the thinner it must be, and the nearer a woman is to
the time of her delivery the shorter her womb must be
extended. As to the action by which this inward orifice
of the womb is opened and shut, it is purely nature; for,
were it otherwise, there would not be so many bastards
begotten as there are; nor would many married women have
so many children were it at their own choice, but they
would hinder conception, though they would be willing
enough to use copulation; for nature has attended that
action with something so pleasing and delightful, that
they are willing to indulge themselves in the use
thereof, notwithstanding the pains they afterwards endure
and the hazard of their lives that often follow it. And
this comes to pass not so much from any inordinate lust
in women, as for that the great Director of Nature, for
the increase and multiplication of mankind, and even of
all other species in the elementary world, hath placed
such a magnetic virtue in the womb, that it draws the
seed to it as the lode-stone draws iron.

     The Author of Nature has placed the womb in the
belly, that the heat might always be maintained by the
warmth of the parts surrounding it; it is therefore
seated in the middle of the Hypogastrium (or lower part
of the belly), between the bladder and the rectum (or
right gut), by which also it is defended from any hurt
through the hardness of the bones; and is placed in the
lower part of the belly for the conveniency of
copulation, and of a birth's being thrust out at the full
time.

     It is of a figure almost round, inclining somewhat
to an oblong, in part resembling a pear; for, from being
broad at the bottom, it gradually terminates in the point
of the orifice, which is narrow.

     The length, breadth and thickness of the womb differ
according to the age and disposition of the body. For in
virgins not ripe it is very small in all its dimensions,
but in woman whose terms flow in large quantities, and
such as frequently use copulation, it is much larger; and
if they had children, it is larger in them than in such
as have none; but in women of a good stature, and well
shaped, it is (as I have said before), from the entry of
the privy parts to the bottom of the womb, usually about
eight inches, but the length of the body of the womb
alone dues not exceed three inches, the breadth thereof
is near about the same, and the thickness of the little
finger, when the woman is not pregnant; but when the
woman is with child it becomes of a prodigious greatness,
and the nearer she is to her delivery the more is the
womb extended.

     It is not without reason then that nature (or the
God of Nature rather) has made the womb of a membranous
substance; for thereby it does the easier open to
conceive, and is gradually dilated from the growth of the
Foetus, or young one, and is afterwards contracted and
closed again, to thrust forth both it and the
afterburden, and then to retire to its primitive seat.
Hence also it is enabled to expel any noxious humours
which may sometimes happen to be contained within it.

     Before I have done with the womb, which is the field
of generation, and ought therefore to be the more
particularly taken care of (for as the seeds of plants
can produce no fruits, nor spring unless sown in ground
proper to waxen and excite their vegetative virtue, so
likewise the seed of a man, though potentially containing
all the parts of a child, would never produce so
admirable an effect if it were not cast into the fruitful
field of Nature, the womb), I shall proceed to a more
particular description of the parts thereof, and the uses
to which nature has designed them.

     The womb then is composed of various similary parts,
that is,  of membranes, veins, arteries, and nerves. Its
membranes are two, and they compose the principal part of
its body; the outmost of which ariseth from the
Peritoneum or cawl, and is very thin, without smooth, but
within equal, that is may the better cleave to the womb,
as it were fleshy and thicker than any else we meet
within the body when a woman is not pregnant, and is
interwoven with all sorts of fibres or small strings,
that it may the better suffer the extension of the child,
and the waters caused during the pregnancy, and also that
it may the easier close again after delivery.

     The veins and arteries proceed both from the
Hypogastrics and the Spermatic Vessels, of which I shall
speak by and by; all these are inserted and terminated in
the proper membrane of the womb. The arteries supply it
with blood for its nourishment, which, being brought
thither in too great a quantity, sweats through the
substance of it, and distils as it were a dew into the
bottom of its cavity; from whence do proceed both the
terms in ripe virgins and the blood which nourisheth the
Embryo in breeding women. The branches which issue from
the spermatic vessels are inserted in each side of the
bottom of the womb, and are much less than those which
proceed from the Hypogastries, those being greater, and
bedewing the whole substance of it. There are yet some
other small vessels, which, arising the one from the
other, are conducted to the internal orifice, and by
these, those that are pregnant do purge away the
superfluity of their terms when they happen to have more
than is used in the nourishment of the infant; by which
means nature shall taken such care of the womb, that,
during its pregnancy, it shall not be obliged to open
itself for the passing away those excrementious humours,
which, should it be forced to do, might often endanger
abortion.

     As touching the nerves, they proceed from the brain,
which furnishes all the inner parts of the lower belly
with them, which is the true reason it hath so great a
sympathy with the stomach, which is likewise very
considerably furnished form the same part; so that the
womb cannot be afflicted with any pain but the stomach is
immediately sensible thereof, which is the cause of those
loathings or frequent vomitings which happen to it.

     But, besides all these parts which compose the womb,
it hath yet four ligaments, whose office is to keep it
firm in its place, and prevent its constant agitation, by
the continual motion of the intestine which surrounds it,
two of which are above and two below. Those above are
called the broad ligaments, because of their broad and
membranous figure, and are nothing else but the
production of the Peritoneum, which, growing out of the
side of the loins towards the reins, come to be inserted
in the sides of the bottom of the womb, to hinder the
body from bearing too much on the neck, and so from
suffering a precipitation, as will sometimes happen when
the ligaments are too much relaxed; and do also contain
the testicles, and as well safely conduct the different
vessels as the ejaculatories to the womb. The lowermost
are called round ligaments, taking their original from
the side of the womb near the horn, from whence they pass
the groin, together with the production of the
Peritoneum, which accompanies them through the rings and
holes of the oblique and transverse muscles of the belly,
which they divide themselves into many little branches,
resembling the foot of a goose, of which some are
inserted into the Os Pubis, and the rest are lost and
confounded with the membranes that cover the upper and
inferior parts of the thigh; and it is that which causes
the numbness which women with child feel in their thighs.
These two ligaments are long, round, and nervous, and
pretty big in their beginning near the Matrix, hollow in
their rise, and all along to the Os Pubis, where they are
a little smaller, and become flat, the better to be
inserted in the manner aforesaid: it is by their means
the womb is hindered from rising too high. Now, although
the womb is held in its natural situation by means of
these four ligaments, yet is has liberty enough to extend
itself when pregnant, because they are very loose, and so
easily yield to its distension. But besides these
ligaments, which keep the womb as it were in a poise, yet
it is fastened for greater security, by its neck, both to
the bladder and rectum, between which it is situated.
Whence it comes to pass that, if at any time the womb be
inflamed, it communicates the inflammation to the
neighbouring parts.

     Its use, or proper action in the work of generation,
is to receive and retain the seed, and to reduce it from
power to action by its heat, for the generation of the
infant, and is therefore absolutely necessary for the
conservation of the species. It also seems by accident to
receive and expel the impurities of the whole body, as
when women have abundance of whites, and to purge away
from time to time the superfluity of the blood, as it
doth every month by the evacuation of the blood, as when
woman is not with child. And this much shall suffice for
the description of  the womb, on which I have been the
larger, because, as I have said before, it is the field
of generation.

     3rdly. The next thing to be described in the
genitals of women is the Testicles or Stones, for such
women have as well as men, but are not for the same use,
and indeed are different from those in men in several
particulars; as first, in place, being within the belly,
whereas in men they are without. Secondly, in figure,
being uneven in women, but smooth in men. Thirdly, in
magnitude, being lesser in women than in men. Fourthly,
they are not fixed in women by muscles, but by ligatures.
Fifthly, they have no prostrates, or kernels as men have.
Sixthly, they differ in form, being depressed or flattish
in women, but oval in men. Seventhly, they have but one
skin, whereas men have four; for the stones of men being
more exposed, nature has provided for them accordingly.
Eighthly, their substance is more soft than in men. And
ninthly, their temperature is colder than men. And so
they differ in all these respects, so do they also in
their use, for they perform not the same actions as
men's, as I shall show presently. As for their seat, it
is in the hollowness of the abdomen, and therefore not
extremely pendulous, but rest upon the ova, or egg. 'Tis
true Galen and Hippocrates did erroneously imagine that
the stones in women both contain and elaborate the seed,
as those do in men, but it is a great mistake; for the
testicles of a woman are as it were no more than two
clusters of eggs, which lie there to be impregnated with
the most spirituous particles, or animating effluviums
conveyed out of the womb through the two tubes or
different vessels. But, however, the stones in women are
very  useful, for where they are defective generation
work is at an end. For though these little bladders,
which are on their superfices, contain nothing of seed,
yet they contain several eggs (commonly to the number of
twenty in each testicle), one of which being impregnated
in the act of coition, by the most spirituous part of the
seed of man, descends through the oviducts into the womb,
and there in process of time becomes a living child,

     4thiy. I am now to speak of the Spermatic Vessels in
women, which are two, and are fastened in their whole
extent by a membranous appendix to the broad ligament of
the womb: Those do not proceed from the testicles as in
men, but are distant from them a finger's breadth at
least; and being disposed after the manner of the
Miseraic Veins, are trained along this membranous
distance between the different vessels and the testicles.
Their substance is, as it were, nervous and moderately
hard; they are round, hollow, big, and broad enough at
their end, joining to the horn of the womb. Some authors
affirm that by these women discharge their seed into the
bottom of the womb; but the whole current of our modern
authors run quite another way, and positive that there is
no seed at all in their vessels, but that after the egg
or eggs in the Ovaria or testicles are impregnated by the
seed of the man, they descend through these two vessels
into the womb, where, being placed, the embryo is
nourished. These vessels are shorter in women than they
are in men; for the stones of a woman lying within the
belly, their passage must needs be shorter; but their
various wreathings and windings in and out makes amends
for the shortness of the passage. These vessels are not
united before they come to the stones, but the biggest
only passes through the testicles, the lesser to the
womb, both for the nourishment of itself and the infant
in it. I will only observe further, that these spermatic
veins receive the arteries as they pass by the womb, and
so there is a mixture between vital and natural blood,
that so the work might be the better wrought; and that it
is so, appears by this, that if you blow up the spermatic
vein you may perceive the right and the left vessel of
the womb blown up; from whence also the communion of all
the vessels of the womb may be easily perceived.

     The deferentia, or carrying vessels, spring from the
lower part of the testicles, and are in colour white, and
in substance sinewy, and pass not the womb straight, but
wreathed with several turnings and windings, as was said
of the spermatic vessels, that so the shortness of the
way may be likewise recompensed by their winding
meanders; yet near the womb they become broad again. They
proceed in two parts from the womb, which resemble horns,
and are therefore called the horns of the womb. And this
is all that is needful to be known or treated of
concerning the parts of generation both in men and women.

     Only since our modern anatomists and physicians are
of different sentiments from the ancients, touching the
woman's contribution of seed for the formation of the
child as well as the man; the ancients strongly affirming
it, but our modern authors being generally of another
judgment; I will here declare the several reasons for
their different opinions, and so pass on.


     SECT. III. Of the Differences between the ancient 
and modern Physicians, touching the Woman's contra-
uniting Seed to the formation of the Child.

     I WILL not make myself a party in this controversy,
but set down impartially, but yet briefly, the arguments
on each side, and leave the judicious reader to judge for
himself.

     Though it is apparent, say the ancients, that the
seed of man is the principal, efficient, and beginning of
action, motion, and generation, yet that the woman
affords seed, and contributes to the procreation of the
child, is evident from hence, that the woman has seminal
vessels, which has been given her in vain had she wanted
seminal excrescence; but since nature forms nothing in
vain, it must be granted they were made for the use of
seed and procreation, and fixed in their proper places to
operate and contribute virtue and efficacy to the seed,
and this, say they, is further proved from hence, that if
women at years of maturity use not copulation to eject
their seed, they often fall into strange diseases, as
appears by young women and virgins; and also it is
apparent that women are never better pleased than when
they are often satisfied this way, which argues the
pleasure a delight they take therein; which pleasure and
delight, say they, double in women to what it is in men;
for, as the delight of men in copulation consists chiefly
in the emission of the seed, so women are delighted both
in the emission of their own and the reception of the
man's.

     But against all this our modern authors affirm that
the ancients were never erroneous, forasmuch as the
testicles in women do not afford seed but are two eggs,
like those of fowls and other creatures, neither have
they any such offices as men, but indeed are as Ovarium,
or receptacle for eggs, wherein these eggs are nourished
by the sanguinary vessels dispersed through them, and
from thence one or more, as they are foecundated by the
man's seed, are conveyed into the womb by the oviducts.
And the truth of this, say they, is so plain that if you
boil them, their liquor will have the same taste, colour
and consistency with the taste of birds' eggs. And if it
be objected that they have no shells, the answer is easy,
for the eggs of fowls, while they are in the ovary, nay,
after they have fallen into the Uterus, hove no shell; 
and though they have one when they are lain, yet it is no
more than a fence, which nature has provided for them
against outward injuries, they being hatched without the
body; but those of women being hatched within the body,
hath no need of any other fence than the womb to secure
them.

     They also further say there are in the generation of
the foetus, or young ones, two principles, active and
passive: the active is the man's seed, elaborated in the
testicles, out of the arterial blood and animal spirits;
the passive principle is the ovum, or egg, impregnated by
the man's seed; for to say that women have true seed, say
they, is erroneous. But the manner of conception is this:
The most spirituous part of man's seed in the act of
copulation, reaching tip to the ovarium or testicles of
the woman (which contains divers eggs, sometimes more,
sometimes fewer), impregnates one of them which, being
conveyed by the oviducts of the bottom of the womb,
presently begins to swell bigger and bigger, and drinks
in the moisture that is plentifully sent thither, after
the same manner that the seeds in the ground suck the
fertile moisture thereof to make them sprout.

     But notwithstanding what is here urged by our modern
anatomists, there are some late writers of the opinion of
the ancients, viz., that women have both, and emit seed
in the act of copulation; and the good women themselves
take it ill to be thought merely passive in those wars
wherein they make such vigorous encounters, and
positively affirm they are sensible of the emission of
their seed in those engagements, and that in it a great
part of the delight which they take in that act consists:
I will not therefore go about to take any of their
happiness away from them, but leave them in the
possession of their imagined felicity.

     Having thus laid the foundation of this work in the
description I have given of the parts dedicated to the
work of generation both in man and woman, I will now
proceed to speak of conception, and of those things that
are necessary to be observed by women from the time of
their conception to the time of their delivery.


CHAPTER II.

OF CONCEPTION; WHAT IT IS, THE SIGNS THEREOF, WHETHER OF
A MALE OR FEMALE; HOW WOMEN ARE TO ORDER THEMSELVES AFTER
CONCEPTION.


     SECT. I. What Conception is, and the Qualification
requisite thereto.

     CONCEPTION is nothing else but an action of the
womb, by which the prolific seed is received and
retained, that an infant may be engendered and formed out
of it. There are two sorts of conception; the one
according to nature, which is followed by the generation
of the infant in the womb; the other is false and wholly 
against nature, in which the seed changes into water, and
produces only false conception, moles, or other strange
matter. Now there are three things principally necessary
in order to a true conception, so that generation may
follow; to wit, diversity of sex, congression, and
emission of seed. Without diversity of sexes there can be
no conception: for though some will have a woman to be an
animal that can engender of herself, it is a great
mistake; there can be no conception without a man to
discharge his seed into her womb. What they allege of
pullets laying eggs without a cock's treading them is
nothing to the purpose, for those eggs, should they be
set under a hen, will never become chickens, because they
never received any prolific virtue from the male, which
is absolutely necessary to this purpose, and is
sufficient to convince us that diversity of sex is
necessary even to those animals as well as to the
generation of man. But diversity of sex, though it be
necessary to conception, yet it won't do alone; there
must also be a congression of those different sexes, for
diversity of sex would profit little if copulation did
not follow. I confess I have heard of some subtile women
who, to cover their sin and shame, have endeavoured to
persuade some person that they were never touched by man
to get them with child; and that one in particular
pretended to conceive by going into a bath where a man
had washed himself a little before and spent his seed in
it, which was drawn and sucked into her womb, as she
pretended. But such stories as these are fit to amuse
them that know no better. Now that these different sexes
should be obliged to come to the touch, which we call
copulation or coition, besides the natural desire of
begetting their like, which stirs up men and woman to it,
the parts appointed for generation are endowed by nature
with a delightful and mutual itch, which begets in them
desire to the action; without which it would not be very
easy for a man born for the contemplation of divine
mysteries, in join himself by the way of coition to a
woman, in regard of the uncleanness of the part and of
the action: and on the other side, if women did but think
of those pains and inconveniences to which they are
subject by their great bellies, and those hazards even of
life itself, besides the unavoidable pains that attend
delivery, it is reasonable to believe they would he
affrighted from it. But neither sex make these
reflections till after the action is over, considering
nothing beforehand but the pleasure of enjoyment. So that
it is from this voluptuous itch that nature obligeth both
sexes to this congression. Upon which the third thing
followeth of course, to wit, the emission of seed into
the womb in the act of copulation. For the woman haying
received this prolific seed into her womb, and retained
it there, the womb thereupon becomes compassed, and
embraces the seed so closely, that, being closed, the
point of a needle, as saith Hippocrates, cannot enter it
without violence; and now the woman may be said to have
conceived; being reduced by its heat from power into
action, the seed abounds, and which are the instruments
by which it begins to trace out the first lineaments of
all the parts to which afterwards, of making use of the
menstruous blood flowing into it, it gives in time growth
and final perfection. And thus much shall suffice to show
what conception is. I shall now proceed to show


     SECT. II. The Signs of Conception.

     THERE are many prognostics or signs of conception. I
will name some of the chief, which are the most certain,
and let alone the rest.

     1. If a woman has been more than ordinary desirous
of copulation, and hath taken more pleasure than usual
therein (which upon recollection she may easily know), it
is a sign of conception.

     2. If she retain the seed in her womb after
copulation; which she may know if she perceives it not to
flow down from the womb as it used to do before; for that
is a sure sign the womb has received into it the inward
orifice and there retains it.

     3. If she finds a coldness and chilliness after
copulation, it shows the heat retired to make conception.

     4. If, after this, she begins to have loathings to
those things which she loved before, and this attended
with a loss of appetite, and a desire after meats to
which she was not affected before, and hath often
nauseatings and vomitings, with sour belchings, and
exceeding weakness of stomach.

     5. After conception the belly waxeth very flat,
because the womb closeth itself together, to nourish and
cherish the seed, contracting itself so as to leave no
empty space.

     6. So it is if the tops of the nipples look redder
than formerly, and the breasts begin to swell, and grow
harder than usual, especially if this be attended with
pain and soreness.

     8. If a woman has twisting and griping pains, much
like those of the cramp in the belly, and about her
navel, it is a sign she has conceived.

     9. If under the lower eye-lid the veins be swelled,
and appear clearly, and the eye be something discoloured,
it is a certain sign she is with child, unless she have
her menses at the same time upon her, or that she has sat
up the night before. This sign has never failed.

     10. Some also make this trial of conception. They
stop the woman's urine in a glass or phial for three
days, and then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and
if they find small living creatures in it, they conclude
that the woman has certainly conceived.

     11. There is also another easy trial. Let the woman
that supposes she has conceived take a green nettle and
put it into her urine, cover it close, and let it remain
therein a whole night; if the woman be with child it will
be full of red spots on the morrow; but if she be not
with child it will he blackish.

     12. The last sign I shall mention is that which is
most obvious to every woman, which is the suppression of
the terms. For, after conception, nature makes use of
that blood for the nourishment of the embryo, which
before was cast out by nature, because it was too great
in quantity. For it is an error to think that the
menstrual blood, simply in itself considered, is bad:
because, if a woman's body be in good temper, the blood
must needs be good; and that it is voided monthly is,
because it offends in quantity, but not in quality. But
though the suppression of the terms is generally a sure
sign of conception, to such persons as have had them
orderly before, yet the having them always is not a sign
there is no conception. Forasmuch as many that have been
with child have had their terms, and some even till the
fifth or sixth month, which happens according to the
woman's being more or less sanguine; for if a woman has
more blood than will suffice for the nourishment of the
embryo, nature continues to void it in the usual way.
Whence the experienced midwife may learn there are few
general rules which do not sometimes admit of an
exception. But this shall suffice to be spoken of the
signs and prognostics of Conception.

SECT. III. Whether Conception be of a Male or Female.

     AUTHORS give us several prognostics of this, though
they are not all to be trusted, yet there is some truth
among them. The signs of a male child conceived are:

     1. When a woman at her rising up is more apt to stay
herself upon her right hand than her left.

     2. Her belly lies rounder and higher than when she
has conceived of a female.

     3. She first feels the child to beat on her right
side.

     4. She carries her burden more light, and with less
pain, than when it is a female.

     5. Her right nipple is redder than the left, and her
right  breast harder and more plump.

     6. Her colour is more clear, nor she so swarthy as
when she has conceived a female.

     7. Observe the circle under her eye, which is a pale
and bluish colour; and if that under her right eye be
moot apparent, and most discoloured, she has conceived a
son.

     8. If she would know she hath conceived of a son or
a daughter, let her milk a drop of her milk into a basin
of fair water; if it spreads and swims at top, it
certainly is a boy; but if it sinks to the bottom, as it
drops in round in a drop, it is a girl. This last is an
infallible rule. And in all it is to be noted, that what
is a sign of a male conception, the contrary holds good
of a female.


     SECT. IV. How a Woman ought to order herself after
Conception.

     MY design in this treatise being brevity, I shall
pretermit all that others say of the causes of twins, and
whether there be any such thing as superfoetations, or a
second conception in a woman, which is yet common enough,
when I come to show you how the midwife ought to proceed
in the delivery of those women that are pregnant with
them. But having already spoken of conception, I think it
now necessary to show how such as have conceived ought to
order themselves during their pregnancy, that they may
avoid those inconveniences which often endanger the life
of the child, and many times their own.

     A woman, after conception, during the time of her
being with child ought to be looked on as indisposed or
sick, though in good health; for child-bearing is a kind
of one month's sickness, being all that time in
expectation of many inconveniences, which such a
condition usually causes in those that are not well
governed during that time; and therefore ought to
resemble a good pilot, who, sailing in a rough sea and
full of rocks, avoids and shuns the danger if he steers
with prudence; but if not, 'tis a thousand to one but he
suffers shipwreck. In like manner a woman with child is
often in danger of miscarrying and losing her life, if
she is not very careful to prevent those accidents to
which she is subject all the time of her pregnancy; all
which time her care must be double, first of herself, and
secondly of the child she goes with; for otherwise a
single error may produce a double mischief; for if she
receives any prejudice, her child also suffers with her.

     Let a woman therefore after conception observe a
good diet, suitable to her temperament, custom,
condition, and quality; and if she can let the air where
she ordinarily dwells be clear and well tempered, free
from extremes either of heat or cold; for being too hot,
it dissipateth the spirits too much, and causeth many
weaknesses; and by being too cold and foggy, it may bring
down rheums and distillations on the lungs, and so cause
her to cough, which by its impetuous motions forcing
downwards, may make her miscarry; she ought also to avoid
all nauseous and ill smells, for sometimes the smoke of a
candle not well put out may cause her to come before her
time; and I have known the smell of charcoal to have the
same effect. Let her also avoid smelling of rue, mint,
pennyroyal, castor, brimstone, etc.

     But with respect to her diet. Women with child have
generally so great loathings and so many different
longings, that it is very difficult to prescribe an exact
diet for them. Only this I think advisable, that they may
use those meats and drinks which are to them most
desirable, though perhaps not in themselves so wholesome
as some others, and it may not be so pleasant; but this
liberty must be made use of with this caution, that what
she so desires be not in itself absolutely unwholesome;
and also that in every thing they take care of excess.
But if a child-baring woman finds herself with such
longings as we have spoken of, and in such quantity as
may be sufficient for herself; and the child, which her
appetite may in a great measure regulate; for it is alike
hurtful for her to fast too long as to eat too much,
especially let her eat a little and often, especially let
her avoid eating too much at night; because the stomach,
being too, much filled, compresseth the diaphragms, and
thereby causes difficulty of breathing. Let her meat be
easy of digestion, such as the tenderest parts of beef,
mutton, veal, sows, pullets, capons, pigeons and
partridges, either boiled or roasted, as she likes best;
new laid eggs are also very good for her; and let her put
into her broths those herbs that purify it, as sorrel,
lettuce, succory, and burrage; for they will purge and
purify the blood: let her avoid whatsoever is hot
seasoned, especially pies and baked meats, which, being
of hot digestion, overcharge the stomach. If she desires
fish, let it be fresh, and such as is taken out of rivers
and running streams. Let her eat quinces, or marmalade,
to strengthen her child; for which purpose sweet almonds,
honey, sweet apples, and full, ripe grapes, are also
good. Let her abstain from all sharp, sour, bitter and
salt things, and all things that tend to provoke the
terms; such as garlic, onions, olives, mustard, fennel,
with pepper, and all spices, except cinnamon, which in
the three last months are good for her. If at first her
diet be sparing, as she increases in bigness let her diet
be increased; for she ought to consider she has a child
as well as herself to nourish. Let her be moderate in her
drinking; and if she drinks wine, let it be rather claret
than white (which will breed good blood, help the
digestion, and comfort the stomach, which is always but
weakly during her pregnancy), but white wine being
diuretic, or that which provokes urine, ought to be
avoided. Let her have a care of too much exercise; and
let her avoid dancing, riding in a coach, or whatever
else puts the body into violent motion, especially in her
first month. But to be more particular I shall here set
down rules proper for every month for  the child-bearing
woman to order herself, from the time she has first
conceived to the time of her delivery.

Rules for the First Two Months.

     As soon as a woman knows (or has reason to believe)
she hath conceived, she ought to abstain from all violent
motions and exercise, whether to walk on foot or ride on
horseback, or in a coach, it ought to be very gently. Let
her also abstain from venery (to which, after conception,
she has usually no great inclination), lest there be a
mole or superfoetation; which is the adding of one embryo
to another. Let her beware she lift not her arms to high,
nor carry great burdens, nor repose herself on hard and
uneasy seats. Let her use moderately meat of good juice
and easy digestion, and let her wine be neither to strong
nor too sharp, but a little mingled with water; or if she
be very abstemious, she may use water wherein cinnamon is
boiled. Let her avoid fastings, thirst, watching,
mourning, sadness, anger, and all other perturbations of
the mind. Let none present any strange or unwholesome
things to her, nor so much as name it, lest she should
desire it, and so either cause her to miscarry, or the
child have some deformity on that account. Let her belly
be kept loose with prunes, raisins, or manna in her
broth; and let her use the following electuary to
strengthen the womb and the child.

     "Take conserve of burrage, bugloss, and red roses,
each two ounces; of balm an ounce, altrent peel and
shebs, mirobolana candied, each an ounce; extract of wood
aloes a scruple; pearl prepared half a dram; red coral,
ivory, each a dram; precious stones each a scruple;
candied nutmegs, two drams; and with syrup of apples and
quinces make an electuary.

     Let her observe the following Rules.

     "Take pearls prepared, a dram; red coral prepared
and ivory, each half a dram; precious stones, each a
scruple; yellow citron peels, mace, cinnamon, cloves,
each half a dram; saffron a scruple; wood aloes half a
scruple; ambergrease six drams; and with six ounces of
sugar dissolved in rose-water, make rouls." Let her also
apply strengtheners to the navel, of nutmegs, mace,
mastich, made up in bags, or a toast dipped in mamsey,
sprinkled with powder of mint. if she happens to desire
clay, chalk, or coals (as many women with child do), give
her beans boiled with sugar; and if she happens to long
for any thing which she cannot obtain, let her presently
drink a large draught of pure cold water.

Rules for the Third Month.

     IN this month and the next be sure to keep from
bleeding; for though it may be safe at other times, it
will not be so to the end of the fourth month; and yet If
too much blood abound, or some incident disease happen,
which requires evacuation, you may use a cupping glass,
with scarification, and a little blood may be drawn from
the shoulders and arms, especially if she has been
accustomed to bleed. Let her also take care of lacing
herself too straitly, but give herself more liberty than
she used to do; for inclosing her belly in too strait a
mould, she hinders the infant from free growth, and often
makes it come down before its time.

Rules for the Fourth Month.

     IN this month you ought also to keep the child-
bearing woman from bleeding, unless in extraordinary
cases; but when this month is past, blood-letting and
physic may be permitted, if it be gentle and mild; and
perhaps it may be necessary to prevent abortion. In this
month she may purge in an acute disease; but purging may
be only used from the beginning of this month to the end
of the sixth; but let her take care that in purging she
use no vehement medicine, nor very bitter, as aloes,
which is an enemy to the child, and opens the mouth of
the vessels; neither let her use Coloquintida, schammony,
nor turbith; she may use cassia, manna, rhubarb, agaric
and senna; but dyacidonium purgans is best, with a little
of the electuary of the juice of roses.

Rules for the Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Months.

     IN these months child-bearing women are often
troubled with coughs, heart beating, fainting, watching,
pains in the loins and hips, and bleeding. The cough is
from a sharp vapour that comes to the jaws and cough
artery from the terms, or from the thin part of that
blood gotten into the veins of the breast, or falling
from the head to the breast; this endangers abortion, and
strength fails from watchings; therefore purge the
humours that fall from the breast with rhubarb and
agaric, and strengthen the head as in a catarrh, and give
sweet lenitives as in a cough. Palpitation and fainting
arise from vapours that go to it by the arteries, or from
blood that aboundeth, and cannot get out at the womb, but
ascends, and oppresses the heart; and in this case
cordials should be used both inwardly and outwardly.
Watching is from sharp dry vapours that trouble the
animal spirits; and in this case use frictions, and let
the woman wash her feet at bed-time, and lot her take
syrup of poppies, dried roses, emulsions of sweet almonds
and white poppy seeds. If she be troubled with pains in
her loins and hips, as in these months she is subject to
be from the weight of her child, who is now grown big and
heavy, and so stretcheth the ligaments of the womb and
parts adjacent, let her hold it up with swathing bands
about her neck. About this time also the woman often
happens to have a flux of blood, either at the nose,
womb, or haemorrhoids from plenty of blood, or from the
weakness of the child that takes it not in, or else from
evil humours in the blood that stirs up nature to send it
forth. And sometimes it happens that the vessels of the
womb may be broken, either by some violent motion, fall,
coughs or trouble of mind (for any of these will work
that effect); and this is so dangerous that in such a
case the child cannot be well; but if it be from blood
only, the danger is no less, provided it flows by the
veins of the neck of the womb, for then it prevents
plethory, and takes not away the nourishment of the
child; but if it proceeds from the weakness of the child
that draws it not, abortion of the child often follows,
or hard travail, or else she goes beyond her time. But if
it flows by the inward veins of the womb there is more
danger by the openness of the womb if it come from evil
blood; the danger is alike from cacochimy, which is like
to fall. upon both. If it arises from plethory, open a
vein, but with very great caution, and use astringents,
of which this following will do well; "Take pearls
prepared, a scruple; red coral, two scruples; mace,
nutmegs, each a dram; cinnamon, half a dram; make a
powder, or with sugar rouls." Or give this powder in
broth: "Take red coral a dram; half a dram precious
stones, each half a scruple; red sander, half a dram;
fiole a dram; sealed earth, tormentil roots, each two
scruples, with sugar of roses, and manus Christi; with
pearl, five drams, make a powder." You may also
strengthen the child at the navel; and if there be a
cacochimy, alter the humours; and if you may do it
safely, evacuate. You may likewise use amulets in her
hands and about her neck; and let her drink hot wine with
a toasted nutmeg. In these months the belly is also
subject to be bound; but if it be without any apparent
disease, the broth of a chicken, or of veal sodden with
oil, or with the decoction of mallows, or marsh-mallows,
mercury, and linseed put up in a clyster, will not be
amiss, but in less quantity than is given in other cases;
to wit, of the decoction five Ounces, of common oil three
ounces, of sugar two ounces, of Cassia Fistula One ounce.
But if she will not take a clyster, one or two yolks of
new laid eggs, or a few pease pottage warm, with a little
salt and sugar, supped up a little before meat, will be
very convenient. But if her belly shall be distended, and
stretched out with wind, a little fennel seed and aniseed
reduced into powder, and mingled with honey and sugar,
made after the manner of an electuary, will do very well.
Also if the thighs and feet swell, let them be anointed
with oxphrodinum (which is a liquid medicine made with
vinegar and rose water) mingled with a little salt.

Rules for the Eighth Month.

     THE eighth is commonly the most dangerous and
therefore the greatest care and caution ought to be used,
and her diet ought to be better in quality, but not more,
nor indeed so much in quantity as before; but as she must
abate her diet, so she must increase her exercise; and
because then women with child, by reason the sharp
humours alter the belly, are accustomed to weaken their
spirits and strength, they may well take before meat an
electuary of Diarrhodon or Aromaticum Rosatum, or
Diamargarton; and sometimes they may lick a little honey,
as they will loathe and nauseate their meat, may take
green ginger, condited with sugar or the rinds of citron
and oranges condited; and let her often use honey for the
strengthening of the infant. When she is not far from her
labour, let her eat every day seven roasted figs before
meat, and sometimes let her lick a little honey. But let
her beware of salt and powdered meat, for it is neither
good for her nor the child.

Rules for the Ninth Month,

     IN the ninth month let her have a care of lifting
any great weight; but let her move a little more to
dilate the parts, and stir up natural heat. Let her take
heed of stooping, and neither sit too much nor lie on her
sides; neither ought she to bend herself much, lest the
child be unfolded in the umbilical ligament, by which
means it often perisheth. Let her walk and stir often,
and let her exercise be rather to go upwards than
downwards: Let her diet now especially be light and easy
of digestion; as damask prunes with sugar, or figs and
raisins before meat; as also the yolk of eggs, flesh and
broth of chickens, birds, partridges, and pheasants;
astringent and roasted meats, with rice, hard eggs,
millet, and such like other things are proper; baths of
sweet water with emollient herbs, ought to be used by her
this month with some intermission. And after the bath let
her belly be anointed with oil of roses and violets; but
for her privy parts it is better to anoint them with the
fat of hens, geese, or ducks, or with oil of lilies, and
the decoction of linseed and fenugreek, boiled with oil
of linseed and marshmallows, or with the following
liniment:

     "Take of mallows and marshmallows, cut and dried, of
each an ounce; of linseed one ounce; let them be boiled
from twenty ounces of water to ten; then let her take
three ounces of the boiled broth; of oil of almonds, and
oil of flower-de-luce, of each one ounce; of deer's suet,
three ounces; let her bathe with this  herself with it
warm."

      If for fourteen days before the birth she do every
morning and evening bathe and moisten her belly with
muscadine and lavender water, the child will be much
strengthened thereby. And if every day she eat toasted
bread it will hinder anything from growing to the child.
Her privy parts may be also gently stroked down with this
fomentation:

     "Take three ounces of linseed; of mallows and
marshmallows sliced, of each one handful; let them be put
into a bag and boiled immediately"; and let the woman
with child every morning and evening take the vapour of
this decoction in a hollow stool, taking great heed that
no wind or air come to her in any part, and then let her
wipe the part so anointed with a linen cloth, that she
may anoint the belly and groin as at first. When she is
come so near her time as to be within ten or fourteen
days thereof, if she begins to feel any more than
ordinary pain, let her use every day the following:

     "Take mallows and marshmallows, of each one handful;
camomile, hard mercury, maiden hair, of each half a
handful; of linseed, four ounces; let them be boiled in
such a sufficient quantity of water as may make a broth
therewith:" But let her not sit too hot upon the seat,
nor higher than a little above her navel: nor let her sit
on it longer than about half-an-hour, lest her strength
languish and decay; for it is better to use it often than
to stay too long in it. And thus have I shown how a
child-bearing woman ought to govern herself in each month
of her pregnancy; how she must order herself at her
delivery, shall be shown in another chapter, after I have
first shown the industrious midwife how the child is
formed in the womb, and the manner of its decumbiture
there.


CHAPTER III.

OF THE PARTS PROPER TO A CHILD IN THE WOMB: HOW IT IS
FORMED THERE, AND THE MANNER OF ITS SITUATION THEREIN.



     IN the last chapter I treated of conception, showed
what it was, how accomplished, its signs, and how she who
had conceived ought to order herself during the time of
her pregnancy. Now, before I come to speak of her
delivery, it is necessary that the midwife be first
acquainted with the parts proper to a child in the womb,
and also that she knows how it is formed, and the manner
of its situation and decumbiture there; which are so
necessary to her, that without the knowledge thereof no
one can tell how to deliver a woman as she ought. This
therefore shall be the work of this chapter I shall begin
with the first of these


     SECT. I. Of the Parts proper to a Child in the Womb.

     In this section I must first tell you what I mean by
the parts proper to the child in the womb, and they are
only those that either help or nourish it, whilst it is
lodged in that dark repository of nature, and that help
and clothe and defend it there, and are cast away as of
no more use, after it is born; and these the two, to wit,
the umbilicus, or navel vessels and the fecundinum: By
the first it is nourished, and by the second clothed and
defended from wrong. Of each of these I shall speak
distinctly; and, first,


     Of the Umbilicus, or Navel-Vessels.

     These are four in number, viz., one vein, two
arteries, and the vessel which is called Urachos: (1) The
vein is that by which the infant is nourished, from the
time of its conception till the time of its delivery;
till, being brought into the light of this world, it has
the same way of concocting its food as we have. This vein
ariseth from the liver of the child, and is divided into
two parts when it hath passed the navel; and these two
are again divided and sub-divided, the branches being
upheld by the skin called Chorion (of which I shall speak
by and by), and are joined to the veins of the  mother's
womb, from whence they have their blood for the
nourishment of the child. (2) The arteries are two on
each side, which proceed from the back branches of the
great artery of the mother; and the vital blood is
carried by these to the child, being ready concocted by
the mother. (3) A nervous or sinewy production is led
from the bottom of the bladder of the infant to the
navel, and this is called Urachos; and its use it to
convey the urine of the infant from the bladder to the
Allantois. Anatomists do very much vary in their opinions
concerning this, some denying any such thing to be in the
delivery of women, and others on the contrary affirming
it; but experience has testified there is such a thing.
For Bartholomew Carbrolius, the ordinary doctor of
anatomies to the college of physicians at Montpelier in
France, records the history of a maid, whose water being
a long time stopped, at last issued out through her
navel. And Johannes Fernelius speaks of the same thing
that happened to a man of thirty years of age, who,
having a stoppage in the neck of the bladder, his urine
issued out of his navel many months together, and that
without any prejudice at all to his health, which he
ascribes to the ill lying of his navel, whereby the
Urachos was not well dried. And Volchier Coltas quotes
such another instance in a maid of 34 years of age at
Nuremberg, in Germany. These instances, though they
happen but rarely, are very sufficient to prove that
there is such a thing as an Urachos in men. These four
vessels before mentioned, to wit, one vein, two arteries,
and the Urachos, do join near to the navel, and are
united by a skin which they have from the chorion, and so
become like a gut or rope, and are altogether void of
sense; and this is that which the good women call the
navel-string. The vessels are thus joined together, that
so they might neither be broken, severed, nor entangled;
and when the infant is born are of no use, save only to
make the ligament which stops the hole of the navel, and
some other physical use, etc.

Of the Secundine, or After-Birth.

     Setting aside the name given to this by the Greeks
and Latins, it is called in English by the name of
Secundine, after-birth, and after-burden, which are held
to be four in number.

     1. The first is called Placentia, because it
resembles the form of a cake, and is knit both to the
navel and Chorion, and makes up the greatest part of the
secundine or after-birth. The flesh of it is like that of
the milt, or spleen, soft, red, and tending something to
blackness, and hath many small veins and arteries in it;
and certainly the chief use of it is for containing the
child in the womb.

     2. The second is the Chorion. This skin, and that
called the Amnios, involve the child round, both above
and underneath and on both sides, which the Allantois
doth not. This skin is that which is most commonly called
the secundine, as it is thick and white, garnished with
many small veins and arteries, ending in the Placentia
before named, being very light and slippery. Its use is
not only to cover the child round about, but also to
receive and safely bind up the roots, and the veins and
arteries, or navel vessels before described,

     3. The third thing which makes up the secundine is
the Allantois, of which there is a great dispute amongst
anatomists. Some say there is such a thing, and others
that there is not. Those that will have it to be a
membrane say it is white, soft and exceedingly thin, and
just under the Placentia, where it is knit to the
Urachos, from whence it receives the urine; and its
office is to keep it separate from the sweat, that the
saltness of it may not offend the tender skin of the
child.

     4. The fourth and last covering of the child is
called Amnios, and it is white, soft, and transparent,
being nourished by some very small veins and arteries.
Its use is not only to wrap the child round, but also to
retain the sweat of the child.

     Having thus described the parts proper to the child
in the womb, I will next proceed to speak of the
formation of the child therein, as soon as I have
explained the hard terms in this section, that those for
whose help this is designed may understand what they
read. There is none, sure, can be so ignorant as not to
know that a vein is that which receives blood from the
liver, and distributes it in several branches to all
parts of the body. Arteries proceed from tho heart, are
in a continual motion, and by their continual motion
quicken the body. Nerve is the same with sinew, and is
that by which the brain adds sense and motion to the
body. Placentia properly signifies a sugar cake; but in
this section it is used to signify a spongy piece of
flesh, resembling a cake full of veins and arteries, and
is made to receive the mother's blood appointed for the
infant's nourishment in the womb. Chorion is the outward
skin which compasseth the child in the womb. The Amnios
is the inner skin which compasseth the child in the womb.
The Allantois is the skin that holds the urine of the
child during the time that it abides in the womb. The
Urachos is the vessel that conveys the urine from the
child in the womb to the Allantois. I now proceed to


     SECT. II. Of the Formation of the Child in the Womb.

     To speak of the formation of the child in the womb
we must begin where nature begins; and that is, at the
act of coition, in which the womb having received the
generative seed, without which there can be no
conception, the womb immediately shuts up itself so close
that not the point of a needle can enter the inward
orifice; and this it does partly to binder the issuing
out of the seed again, and partly to cherish it by an
inbred heat, the better to provoke it to action; which is
one reason why women's bellies are so lank at their first
conception. The woman having thus conceived, the first
thing which is operative in the conception is the spirit,
whereof the seed is full, which, nature quickening by the
heat of the womb, stirs it up to action. This seed
consists of very different parts, of which some are more
and some are less pure. The internal spirits therefore
separate those parts that are less pure, which are thick,
cold and clammy, from them that are more pure and noble.
The less pure are cast to the outsides, and with them the
seed is circled round, and of them the membranes are
made, in which that seed which is the most pure is
wrapped round and kept close together, that it may be
defended from cold and other accidents, and operate the
better.

     The first thing that is formed is the Amnios, the
next the Chorion; and they enwrap the seed round as it
were a curtain. Soon after this (for the seed thus shut
up in the woman lies not idle) the navel veil is bred,
which pierceth those skins, being yet very tender, and
carries a drop of blood from the veins of the mother's
womb to the seed; from which drop is formed the liver,
from which liver there is quickly bred the Vena Cava, or
chief vein, from which all the rest of the veins that
nourish the body spring; and now the seed hath something
to nourish it, whilst it performs the rest of nature's
work, and also blood administered to every part of it to
form flesh.

     This vein being formed, the navel arteries are soon
after formed, then the great artery, of which all others
are but branches, and then the heart; for the liver
furnisheth the arteries with blood to form the heart, the
arteries being made of seed, but the heart and the flesh
of blood. After this the brain is formed, and then the
nerves, to give sense and motion to the infant.
Afterwards the bones and flesh are formed, all of the
bones, first the Vertebrae or chin bones, and then the
skull, etc.

     As to the time in which this curious part of
nature's workmanship is formed, physicians assign four
different reasons wherein this microcosm is formed, and
its formation perfected in the womb. The first is
immediately after coition; the second time of forming,
say they, is when the womb by the force of its own innate
power and virtue makes a manifest mutation or coagulation
in the seed, so that all the substances thereof seems
coagulated flesh and blood, which happens about the
twelfth or fourteenth day after copulation; and though
this concretion of fleshy mass abound with spirits, yet
it remains undistinguishable without any form, and may be
called a rough draft of the Foetus or Embryo, The third
time in which this fabric is come to some further
maturity is, when the principal parts may be in some
measure distinguished, and one may discern the Liver,
umbilical veins, arteries, nerves, brain and heart; and
this is about eighteen days after conception. The fourth
and last time assigned by physicians for the formation of
the child, is about the thirtieth day after conception
for a male, but for a female, they tell us forty-two or
forty-five days are required, though for what reason I
know not, nor does it appear by the birth: for if the
male receives its formation fifteen days sooner than the
female, why should it not be born so much sooner too?
But, as to that, every day's experience shows us the
contrary, for women go the full time of nine months both
with male and female. But at this time of thirty days (or
some will have it forty-five), the outward parts may be
also seen exquisitely elaborate, and distinguished by
joints; and from this time the Child begins to be
animated, though as yet there is no sensible motion; and
has all the parts of the body, though small and very
tender, yet entirely formed and figured, although not
longer in the whole than one's middle finger; and from
thenceforward, the blood flowing every day more and more
to the womb, not by intervals like their courses, but
continually, it grows bigger and stronger to the end of
nine months, being the full time of a woman's ordinary
labour.
<Illustration: The action of quickening> arist10.jpg

     Very great have been the disputes among both
philosophers and physicians about the nourishment of the
child in the womb, both as to what it is, and which way
it receives it. Almaeon was of opinion that the infant
drew in its nourishment by its whole body because it is
rare and spongy, as a sponge sucks in water on every
side; and so he thought the infant sucked blood, not only
from its mother's veins, but also from the womb.
Democritus held that the child sucked in the nourishment
at its mouth. Hippocrates affirms that the child sucks in
both nourishment and breath by its mouth from the mother,
for which he gives two reasons: 1. That it will suck as
soon as it is born, and therefore must have learnt to
suck before. 2. Because there are excrements found in the
guts as soon as it is born. But neither of these reasons
are sufficient to prove his assertion. For, as to the
first, "That the child will suck as soon as it is born,"
it is from a natural instinct; for take a young cat that
never saw her dam catch a mouse, and yet she will catch
mice herself as soon as she is able. And as to this
second reason, it is a sufficient answer to say, that the
excrements found in the guts of an infant new-born are
not excrements of the first concoction, which is evident,
because they don't stink, but are the thickest part of
the blood, which is conveyed from the vessels of the
spleen to the guts. Having therefore said enough to
confute the opinion of the child's receiving the
nourishment by the mouth, I do affirm that the child
receives its nourishment in the womb by the navel; and
that it should be so, is much more consonant to truth and
reason; which being granted it will easily follow, that
the nourishment the child receives is by the pure blood
conveyed info the liver by the navel vein, which is a
branch of the Vena Porta, or gate vein, and passeth to
the small veins of the liver. Here this blood is made
more pure, and the thicker and rawer part of it is
conveyed to the spleen and kidneys, and the thick
excrement of it to the guts, which is that excrement
found there so soon as they are born. The pure part is
conveyed to the Vena Cava, and by it distributed
throughout the body by the small veins, which, like so
many small rivulets, pass to every part of it. This blood
is accompanied (as all blood is) with a certain watery
substance, the better to convey it through the passage it
is to run in, which, as in men, is breathed out by
sweating, and contained in the Amnios, as I have already
said.


     SECT. III. Of the Manner of the Child's lying in the
Womb.

     I COME now to show after what manner the child lies
in the womb; a thing so essential for a midwife to know,
that she can be no midwife who is ignorant of it, and
yet, even about this, authors extremely differ. For there
are not two in ten that agree what is the form that the
child lies in the womb, or in what fashion it lies there;
and yet this may arise in a great measure from the
different figures that the child is found in, according
to the different times of the woman's pregnancy; for near
the time of its deliverance out of those winding chambers
of nature, it oftentimes changes the form in which it lay
before for another. Hippocrates affirms the child is so
placed in the womb as to have its hands, its knees, and
its head bent down towards its feet, so that it lies
round together, its hands upon both its knees, and its
face between them; so that each eye toucheth each thumb,
and its nose betwixt its knees: and Bartholinus was also
of the same opinion. Columbus describes the posture of
the chilled thus: "The right arm bowed, the fingers
whereof under the ear and above the neck; the head bowed
down, so that the chin toucheth the breast, the left arm
bowed above both breast and face, and the left arm is
propped up by the bending of the right elbow; the legs
are lift upwards, the right of which is so lifted up that
the thigh toucheth the belly, the knees the navel, the
heel the left buttock, and the foot is turned back and
covereth the secrets; the left thigh toucheth the belly,
and the leg is lifted to the breast, the back lying
outward." And thus much shall suffice touching the
opinion of  authors.

     I will now show the several situations of the child
in the mother's womb, according to the different times of
pregnancy, by  which those that are contrary to nature,
and are the chief cause of all ill labours, will be the
more easily conceived by the understanding midwife; it
ought, therefore, in the first place, to be observed,
that the infant, as well male as female, is generally
situated in the midst of the womb; for though sometimes
to appearance a woman's belly seems higher on one side
than the other, it is so with respect to her belly only,
and not of her womb, in the midst of which it is always
placed.
<Illustration: Conception to Fourth Month> arist8.jpg
<Illustration: Fifth Month to Ninth Month> arist9.jpg

     But in the second place, a woman's great belly makes
different figures, according to the different times of
pregnancy; for, when she is young with child. the embryo
is always found of a round figure, a little oblong,
having the spine moderately turned inwards, the thighs
folded, and a little raised, to which the legs are so
joined that the heels touch the buttocks; the arms are
bending, and the hands placed upon the knees, towards
which the head is inclining forwards, so that the chin
toucheth the breast; in which posture it resembleth one's
sitting to ease nature, and stooping down with the head
to see what comes from him. The spine of its back is at
that time placed towards the mother's, the head
uppermost, the face downwards; and, proportionately to
its growth it extends its members by little and little,
which were exactly folded in the first month. In this
posture it usually keeps till the seventh or eighth
month, and then by a natural propensity and disposition
of the upper part of the body, the head is turned
downwards toward the inward orifice of the womb, tumbling
as it were over its head, so that then the feet are
uppermost, and the face towards the mother's great gut;
and this turning of the infant in this manner, with its
head downwards, towards the latter end of a woman's
reckoning, is so ordered by nature, that it may thereby
be the better disposed for its passage into the world at
the time of its mother's labour, which is not then far
off; and indeed several children turn not at all until
the very time of birth; for in this posture all its
joints are most easily extended in corning forth; for by
this means the arms and legs cannot hinder its birth,
because they cannot be bended against the inward orifice
of the womb; and the rest of the body, being very supple,
passeth without any difficulty after the head, which is
hard and big, being past the birth. 'Tis true there are
divers children that lie in the womb in another posture,
and come to the birth with their feet downwards,
especially if there be twins; for then by their different
motions they do so disturb one another, that they seldom
come both in the same posture at the time of labour, but
one will come with the head, and another with the feet,
or perhaps lie across; and sometimes neither of them will
come right. But however the child may be situated in the
womb, or in whatever posture it presents itself at the
time of birth, if it be not with its head forwards, as I
have before described, it is always against nature; and
the delivery will occasion the mother more pain and
danger, and require greater care and skill from the
midwife than when the labour is more natural; of which
the following scheme will give a great demonstration
which is the form of a child in the womb ready for the
birth, naked and disrobed of all its tunicles, proper and
common.


CHAPTER IV.

A GUIDE FOR WOMEN IN TRAVAIL, SHOWING WHAT IS TO BE DONE
WHEN THEY FALL IN LABOUR, IN ORDER FOR THEIR DELIVERY.


     THE end of all that we have been treating of is the
bringing forth a child into the world with safety both to
the mother and the infant, as the whole time of a woman's
pregnancy may very well be termed a kind of labour; for,
from the time of her conception to the time of bar
delivery, she labours under many difficulties, is subject
to many distempers, and in continual danger, from one
effect or another, till the time of birth comes, and when
that comes the greatest labour and travail comes along
with it, insomuch that then all her other labours are
forgotten, and that only is called the time of her
labour; and to deliver her safely is the principal
business of the midwife. And to assist her therein shall 
be the chief design of this chapter. The time of the
child's being ready for its birth, when Nature endeavours
to cast it forth, is that which is properly the time of a
woman 's labour; nature then labouring to be eased of its
burden. And since many child-bearing women (especially of
their first child) are often mistaken in their reckoning,
and so when they draw near their time take every pain
they meet with for their labour, which often proves
prejudicial and troublesome to them when it is not so, I
will, in the first section of this chapter, set down some
signs, by which a woman may know when the true time of
her labour is come.


     SECT. I. The Signs of the True Time of a Woman's
Labour.

     WHEN women with child, especially of their first,
perceive any extraordinary pains in their belly, they
immediately send for their midwife, as taking it for
their labour, and then if the midwife be not a skilful
and judicious woman, to know the time of her labour, but
takes it for granted without further inquiry (for some
such there are), and so goes about to put her into labour
before nature is prepared for it, she may endanger the
lives both of mother and child, by breaking the Amnios
and Chorion. These pains, which are often mistaken for
labour, are removed by warm cloths laid to the belly, and
the application of a clyster or two, by which those pains
that precede a true labour are rather furthered than
hindered. There are also other pains incident to women in
that condition from a flux of the belly, which are easily
known by the frequent stools that follow them.

     The signs therefore of labour some few days before
are, that the woman's belly, which before lay high, sinks
down, and hinders her from walking so easily as she used
to do; also there flows from the womb slimy humours,
which nature has appointed to moisten and smooth the
passages that its inward orifices may  be the more easily
dilated when there is occasion; which beginning to open
at that time, suffers that slime to flow away, which
proceeds from the glandules, called Prostata. These are
signs preceding labour; but when she is presently falling
into labour, the signs are great pains about the region
of the reins and loins, which, coming and reiterating by
intervals, answer to the bottom of the belly by congruous
throws, and sometimes the face is red and inflamed, the
blood being much heated by the endeavours a woman makes
to bring forth her child; and likewise, because during 
these strong throws her respiration is intercepted, which
causes the blood to have recourse to her face; also her
privy parts are swelled by the infant's head lying in the
birth, which, by often thrusting, causes those pains to
descend outwards. She is much subject to vomiting, which
is a sign of good labour and speedy delivery, though by
ignorant women thought otherwise, for good pains are
thereby excited and redoubled; which vomiting is
occasioned by the sympathy there is between the womb and
the stomach. Also when the birth is near, women are
troubled with a trembling in the thighs and legs, not
with cold, like the beginning of an ague fit, but with
the heat of the whole body; though it must be granted
this does not happen always. Also if the humours, which
then flow from the womb, are coloured with blood, it is
that which the midwives call Shows, and is an infallible
mark of the birth's being near. And if then the midwife
puts her fingers into the neck of the womb, she will find
the inner orifice dilated; at the opening of which, the
membranes of the infant containing the waters present
themselves, and are strongly forced downwards with each
pain she hath; at which time one may perceive them
sometimes to resist, and then again press forward the
finger, being more less hard and extended, according as
the pains are stronger or weaker. These membranes, with
the waters in them, when they are before the head of the
child, which the midwives call the Gathering of the
Waters, resemble, to the touch of the finger, those eggs
which have no shell, but are covered only with a simple
membrane. After this, the pains still redoubling, the
membranes are broken by a strong impulsion of the waters,
which presently flow away, and then the head of the
infant is presently felt naked, and presents itself at
the inward orifice of her womb; when these waters come
thus away, then the midwife may be assured the birth is
very near, this being the most certain sign that can be;
for the Amnios Allantois being broken, which contain
those waters, by the pressing forward of the birth, the
child is no better able to subsist long in the womb
afterward than a naked man in a heap of snow. Now these
waters, if the child comes presently after them,
facilitate the labour, by making the passage slippery:
and therefore let no midwife (as some foolishly have
done) endeavour to force away the water, for Nature knows
best when the true time of the birth is, and therefore
retains the water till that time. But if by accident the
water breaks away too long before the birth, then such
things as will hasten it may be safely admitted; and what
those things are I shall show in another section.


     SECT. III. How a Woman ought to be ordered when the
Time of her Labour is come.

     WHEN it is known that the true time of her labour is
come by the signs laid down in the foregoing section, of
which those that are most to be relied on are pains and
strong throws in the belly, forcing downwards towards the
womb, and dilation of the inward orifice, which may be
perceived by touching it with the finger, and the
gathering of the waters before the head of the child, and
thrusting down of the membranes which contain them;
through which, between the pains, one may in some manner
with the finger discover the part which presents (as was
said before) especially if it be the head of the child,
by its roundness and hardness, I say, if these things
concur, and are evident, the midwife may be sure it is
the time of her labour; and care must be taken to get all
things ready that are necessary to comfort the woman in
that time. And the better to help her, be sure to see she
is not straight laced; you may also give her a pretty
strong clyster or more, if there be occasion, provided it
be done at the beginning, and before the child be too
forward, for it will be difficult for her to receive them
afterwards; the benefit accruing hereby will be, that
they excite the gut to discharge itself of its
excrements, that so the rectum being emptied, there may
be more space for the dilation of the passage; likewise
to cause the pains to bear the more downward, through the
endeavours she makes when she is at stool; and, in the
meantime, all other necessary things for her labour
should be put in order, both for the midwife and the
child. To this end some will get a midwife's stool; but a
pallet bed girded is much the best way, placed near the
fire, if the season so require; which pallet ought to be
so placed that there may be easy access to it on every
side, that the woman may be the more readily assisted as
there is occasion.

     If the woman abounds with blood, to bleed her a
little may not he improper, for thereby she will both
breathe the better, and have her breasts more at liberty,
and likewise more strength to bear down her pains; and
this she may do without danger, because the child being
about that time ready to be born, has no more need of the
mother's blood for its nourishment. Besides, this
evacuation does many times prevent her having a fever
after delivery. Also before her delivery, if her strength
will permit, let her walk up and down her chamber; and
that she may have strength so to do, it will be necessary
to give her some good strengthening things, such as jelly
broth, new laid eggs, or some spoonfuls of burnt wine.
And let her by all means hold out her pains, bearing them
down as much as she can at the time when they take her;
and let the midwife from time to time touch the inward
orifice with her finger, to know whether the waters are
ready to break, and whether the birth will follow soon
after; let her also anoint the woman's privities with
emollient oil, hog's grease, and fresh butter, if she
finds they are hard to be dilated. Let the midwife
likewise be all the while near the labouring woman, and
diligently observe her gestures, complaints, and pains,
for by this she may guess pretty well how her labour
advanceth;
because when she changeth her ordinary groans into loud
cries, it is a sign the child is very near the birth; for
at that time her pains are greater and more frequent. Let
the woman likewise by intervals rest herself on the bed
to regain her strength, but not too long, especially if
she be little, short, and thick; for such women have
always worst labours if they lie long on their beds in
their travail; it is better therefore that they walk as
much as they can about the chamber, the women supporting
them under their arms, if it be necessary, for by this
means the weight of the child causeth the inward orifice
of the womb to dilate sooner than in bed; and if her
pains be stronger and more frequent, her labour will not
be near so long.

     Let not the labouring woman be concerned at those
qualms and vomitings which perhaps she may find come upon
her, for they will be much for her advantage in the
issue, however uneasy she may be for the time, as they
further her throws and pains provoking downwards. But to
proceed:

     When the waters of the children are ready and
gathered, which may be perceived through the membranes to
present themselves to the inward orifices, of the bigness
of the whole dilation, the midwife ought to let them
break of themselves, and not, like some hasty midwives,
who, being impatient of the woman's long labour, break
them, intending thereby to hasten their business, when,
instead thereof, they retard it; for by the too hasty
breaking of these waters (which nature designed to cause
the infant to slide forth the more easily), the passage
remains dry by which means the pains and throws of the
labouring woman are less efficacious to bring forth the
infant than they would otherwise have been. it is
therefore much the better way to let the waters break of
themselves; after which the midwife may with ease feel
the child bare by that which first presents, and thereby
discern whether it comes right, that is, with the head
foremost, for that is the most proper and natural way of
its birth; if the head come right, she will find it
round, big, hard, and equal; but if it be in any other
part, she will find it unequal, rugged, and soft or hard,
according to the nature of the part it is. And this being
the true time when the woman ought to deliver if nature
be not wanting to perform its office, therefore, when the
midwife finds the birth thus coming forward, let her
hasten to assist and deliver it, for it ordinarily
happens soon after if it be natural.

     But if it happens, as sometimes it may, that the
waters break away too long before the birth, in such a
case those things that hasten nature may be safely
admitted; to which purpose let her make use of
pennyroyal, dittany, juniper berries, red coral, betony,
featherfew boiled in white wine, and a draught of it
drunk; or it would be much better to take the juice of it
when it is in its prime, which is in May; and having
clarified it, let them make it into a syrup, with double
its weight of sugar, and keep it by them all the year, to
use when occasion calls for it. Mugwort, used in the same
manner, is also good in this case. Also a dram of
cinnamon powder given inwardly profits much in this case;
and so does tansy bruised and applied to the privities,
or an oil of it so made and used as you were taught
before. The Stones Aetites held to the privities are of
extraordinary virtue, and instantly draw away both child
and after burden; but great care must be taken to remove
it presently, or it will draw forth the womb and all; for
such is the magnetic virtue of this stone, that both
child and womb follow it as readily as iron doth the
lode-stone, or as the lode-stone the North star.

     There are many other things that physicians affirm
are good in this case; among which are an ass's or a
horse's hoof hung near the privities; a piece of red
coral hung near the said place; a lode-stone helps much,
hold in the woman's left hand, or the skin which a snake
hath cast off, girt about the middle next the skin. These
things are mentioned by Mizaldus; but setting those
things aside, as not so certain, notwithstanding Mizaldus
quotes them, the following prescriptions are very good to
give speedy deliverance to women in travail.
1. A decoction of white wine, made in savory and drank.
2. Take wild tansy, or silver-weed, bruise it, and apply
it to the woman's nostrils.
3. Take date stones and beat them to powder, and let her
take half a dram of them in white wine at a time.
4. Take parsley, and bruise it, and press out the juice,
and dip a linen cloth in it, and put it up so dipped into
the mouth of the womb; it will presently cause the child
to come away though it be dead, and will bring away the
after burden. Also the juice of parsley is a thing of so
great virtue (especially stone parsley), that being drunk
by a woman with child, it cleanseth not only the womb,
but also the child in the womb, of all gross humours.
5. A scruple of castorum in powder, in any convenient
liquor, is very good to be taken in such a case; and so
also is two or
three drops of spirit of Castorum in any convenient
liquor; also eight or nine drops of spirits of myrrh
given in any convenient liquor, gives speedy deliverance.
6. Give a woman in such a case another woman's milk to
drink; it will cause speedy delivery, and almost without
pain.
7. The juice of leeks, being drunk with warm water, hath
a mighty operation to cause speedy delivery.
8. Take poppy seeds, and beat them into powder, and mix
the powder with oil, with which oil anoint the loins and
privities of the woman with child; it gives her
deliverance speedily, and with less pain than can be
imagined.
9. Take a swallow's nest, and dissolve it in water,
strain it, and drink it warm; it gives delivery with
great speed and much ease.

     Note this also in general, That all things that move
the terms are pod for making the delivery easy; such as
myrrh, white amber in white wine, or lily-water, two
scruples or a dram; or cassia lignea, dittany, each a
dram, cinnamon half a dram, saffron a scruple, give a
dram; or take borax mineral as a dram, cassia lignea a
scruple, saffron six grains, and give it in sack; or take
cassia lignea, a dram; dittany, amber, of each a dram;
cinnamon, borax, of each a dram and a half, saffron a
scruple, and give her half a dram; or give her some drops
of oil of hazel in convenient liquor; or two or three
drops of oil of cinnamon in vervain water. Some prepare
the secundine thus: Take the navel string, and dry it in
an oven; take two drams of the powder, cinnamon a dram,
saffron half a scruple, with juice of savin make torches
-- give two drams; or wash the Secundine in wine, and
bake it in a pot, then wash it in endive water and wine -
- take half a dram of it; long pepper, galangal, of each
half a dram; plantain and endive seed, of each a dram and
a half; lavender seed, four scruples: make a powder; or
take laudanum two drams, storax, calamite, benzion, of
each half a dram; musk, ambergrease, each six grains;
make a powder, or torches for a fume. Or use pessaries to
provoke the birth; take galbanum dissolved in vinegar, an
ounce: myrrh two drams, saffron a dram; with oil of oats
make a pessary.

An Ointment for the Navel

     Take oil of keir two ounces, juice of savin an
ounce, of leeks and mercury, each half an ounce; boil
them to the consumption of the juice; and galbanum
dissolved in vinegar, half an ounce, myrrh two drams,
storax liquid a dram; round birthwort, sowbread,
cinnamon, saffron, a dram; with wax make an ointment, and
apply it.

     If the birth be retarded through the weakness of the
mother, refresh her with applying wine and soap to the
nose, Confect, Alkermas, Diamarg.

     These things may be applied to help nature in the
delivery when the child comes to the birth the right way,
and yet the birth is retarded; but if she finds the child
comes the wrong way, and she is not able to deliver the
woman as she ought to be, by helping nature and saving
both mother and child (for it is not enough to lay a
woman, if it might be done by another with more safety
and ease, and less hazard both to woman and child), then
let her send speedily for better and more able help and
not as I once knew a midwife, when a woman she was to
deliver had hard labour, rather than a man-midwife should
be sent for, would undertake to deliver the woman herself
(though told by others that it was a man's business), and
in her attempting. it brought away the child, but left
the head of the infant in the mother's womb; and had not
a man-midwife been presently sent for, the mother had
lost her life as well as the child: such persons may
rather be termed butchers than midwives. But supposing
the woman's labour to be natural, I will next show what
the midwife ought to do in order to her delivery.


CHAPTER V.
OF NATURAL LABOUR; WHAT IT IS, AND WHAT THE MIDWIFE IS TO
DO IN SUCH A LABOUR.

<Illustration: Position of the child in the womb just
before delivery> arist11.jpg


     SECT. I. What Natural Labour is.

     THERE are four things to denominate a Woman's labour
natural; the first is, that it be at the full time; for
if a woman comes before her time it cannot properly be
termed natural labour, neither will it be so easy as if
she had completed her nine months. The second thing is
that it be speedy, and without an ill accident; for when
the time of the birth is come, nature is not dilatory in
the bringing of it forth, without some ill accident
intervene, which render it unnatural. The third is, that
the child be alive; for [you] will grant, that the being
delivered of a dead child is very unnatural. The fourth
thing requisite to a natural birth is, that the child
come right; for if the position of the child in the womb
be contrary to what is natural, and the event proves it
so too often, making that which should be a time of life
the death both of the mother and the child.

     Having thus told you what I mean by natural labour,
I shall next show how the midwife is to proceed herein,
in order to the woman's delivery. When all the foregoing
requisites concur, and after the waters be broken of
themselves, let the labouring woman be conducted to a
pallet bed, provided near the fire for that purpose, as
has already been said, and let there rather be a quilt
laid upon the pallet bedstead than a featherbed, having
thereon linen and cloths in many folds with such other
things as are necessary, and that may be changed
according to the exigence requiring it, so that the woman
may not be incommoded with blood, water, and other filth
which is voided in labour. The bed ought so to be ordered
that the woman, being ready to be delivered, should lie
on her back upon it, having her body in a convenient
posture; that is, her head and breast a little raised, so
that she be between lying and sitting; for being so
placed, she is best capable of breathing. and likewise
will have more strength to bear her pains, than if she
lay otherwise, or sunk down in her bed. Being so placed,
she must spread her thighs abroad, folding her legs a
little towards her buttocks, somewhat raised by a small
pillow underneath, to the end her rump should have more
liberty to retire back; and let her feet be stayed
against some firm things; besides this, let her take hold
of some good women attending her with her hands, that she
may the better stay herself during her pains. She being
thus placed near the side of her bed, having her midwife
by, the better to assist upon occasion, let her take
courage, and help her pains the best she can, bearing
them down when they take her, which she must do by
holding in her breath, and forcing herself as much as
possible, in like manner as when she goes to stool; for
by such straining, the diaphragma, or midriff, being
strongly thrust downwards, necessarily forces down the
womb, and the child in it. In the meantime let the
midwife endeavour to comfort her all she can, exhorting
her to bear her labour courageously, telling her it will
be quickly over, and that there is no fear but she will
have a speedy delivery. Let the midwife also, having no
rings on her hands, anoint it with oil or fresh butter,
and therewith dilate gently the inward orifice of the
womb, putting her finger ends into the entry thereof, and
then stretch them one from the other, when her pains take
her; by those means, endeavouring to help forward the
child, and thrusting by little and little the sides of
the orifice towards the hinder part of the child's head,
anointing the parts also with fresh butter, if it be
necessary.

     When the head of the infant is somewhat advanced
into this inward orifice, the midwife's phrase is, "It is
crowned," because it girds and surrounds it just as a
crown; but when it is so far that the extremities begin
to appear without the privy parts, then say they "The
child is in the passage"; and at this time the woman
feels herself as it were scratched, or pricked with pins,
and is ready to imagine that the midwife hurts her, when
it is occasioned by the violent distension of those
parts, and the laceration which at times the bigness of
the child's head causeth there. When things are in this
posture, let the midwife seat herself conveniently to
receive the child, which will now come quickly, and with
her finger ends (which she must be sure to keep close
pared), let her endeavour to thrust the crowning of the
womb (of which I have spoken before) back over the head
of the child. And as soon as it is advanced as far as the
ears, or thereabouts, let her take hold of the two sides
with her two hands, that when a good pain comes she may
quickly draw forth the child, taking care that the navel-
string be not then entangled about the neck, or any other
part, as sometimes it is, lest thereby the after burden
be pulled with violence, and perhaps the womb also, to
which it is fastened; and so either cause her to flood,
or else break the strings, both which are of bad
consequences to the woman, whose delivery may thereby be
rendered the more difficult. It must also be carefully
observed that the head be not drawn forth straight, but
shaking it a little from one side to the other, that the
shoulders may sooner and easier take their place
immediately after it be past, without losing any time,
lest the head being past, the child be  stopped there by
the largeness of the shoulders, and so come in danger of
being suffocated and strangled in the passage, as it
sometimes happens for the want of care therein. But as
soon as the head is born, if there be need, she may slide
in her fingers under the armpits, and the rest of the
body will follow without difficulty.

     As soon as the midwife hath in this manner drawn
forth the child, let her put it on one side, lest the
blood and water which follow immediately should do it any
injury, by running into its mouth and nose, as it would
do if it lay on its back, and so endanger the choking it.
The child being thus born, the next thing requisite is to
bring away the after-burden; but before that, let the
midwife be very careful to examine whether there be no
more children in the womb; for sometimes a woman may have
twins that expected it not; which the midwife may easily
know by the continuance of the pains after the child is
born, and the bigness of the mother's belly. But the
midwife may be more sure of it if the puts her hand up to
the entry of the womb, and finds there another water
gathering, and a child in it presenting to the passage;
and if she finds so, she must have a care of going about
to fetch the after birth, till the woman be delivered of
all the children she is pregnant with. Wherefore the
first string must be cut, being first tied with a thread
three or four double, and fasten the other end with a
string to the woman's thigh, to prevent the inconvenience
it may cause by hanging between her thighs; and then
removing the child already born, she must take care to
deliver her of the rest, whether more or less, observing
all the same circumstances as were to the first; after
which it will be necessary to fetch away the after-birth
or births. But of that I shall treat in another section;
and first show what is to be done to the new-born infant.


     SECT. II. Of the cutting of the Child's Navel-
String.

     THOUGH this is by many accounted but a trifle, yet
great care is to be taken about it; and it shows none of
the least art and skill of a midwife to do it as it
should be: and that it may be so done, the midwife ought
to observe, 1. the Time; 2. the Place; 3. the Manner; 4.
the Event.

     The time is as soon as ever the infant comes out of
the womb, whether it brings part of the after-birth with
it or not; for sometimes the child brings into the world
a piece of the Amnios upon its head, and is what the good
women call the caul, and ignorantly attribute some
extraordinary virtue to the child that is so born; but
this opinion is only the effect of their ignorance; for
when a child is born with such a crown (as some call it),
upon its brows, it generally betokens weakness, and
denotes a short life. But to the matter in hand. As soon
as the child is come into the world, consider whether it
be weak or strong; and if it be weak, let the midwife
gently put back part of the vital and natural blood into
the body of the child by its navel; for that recruits a
weak child (the vital and natural spirits being
communicated by the mother to the child by its navel-
string), but if the child be strong, the operation is
needless. Only let me advise you that many children that
are born seemingly dead may be soon brought to life again
if you squeeze six or seven drops of blood out of that
part of the navel-string which is cut off, and give it to
the child inwardly.

     As to the place in which it should be cut, that is,
whether it should be cut long or short, it is that which
authors can scarce agree in, and which many midwives
quarrel about; some prescribing it to be cut at four
fingers breadth, which is at the best but an uncertain
rule, unless all fingers were one size. It is a received
opinion, that the parts adapted to generation are
contracted or dilated according to the cutting of the
navel-string; and that is the reason why midwives are
generally so kind to their own sex, that they leave a
longer part of the navel-string of a male than of a
female, because they would have the males well provided
for the encounter of Venus; and the reason they give why
they cut that of females shorter is, because they believe
it makes them modest, and their privities narrower, which
makes them more acceptable to their husbands. Mizaldus
was not altogether of the opinion of these midwives, and
therefore he orders the navel-string to be cut long both
in male and female children; for which he gives this
reason that the instrument of generation follows the
proportion of it, and therefore if it be cut too short in
a female it will be a hindrance to her having children. I
will not go about to contradict this opinion of Mizaldus,
that experience has made good. The one is, that if the
navel-string of a child after it is cut be suffered to
touch the ground, the child will never hold its water,
neither sleeping nor waking, but will be subject to an
involuntary making of water all its lifetime. The other
is, that a piece of the child's navel-string carried
about one, so that it touch his skin, defends him that
wears it from the falling sickness and convulsions.

     As to the manner in which it must he cut: Let the
midwife take a brown thread four or five times double, of
an ell long, or thereabouts, tied with a single knot at
each of the ends, to prevent their entangling; and with
this thread so accommodated (which the midwife must have
in readiness before the woman's labour, as also a good
pair of scissors, that so no time may be lost), let her
tie the string within an inch of the belly with a double
knot, and, turning about the ends of the thread, let her
tie two more on the other side of the string, reiterating
it again, if it be necessary; then let her cut off the
navel another inch below the ligature, towards the after-
birth, so that there only remains but two inches of the
string, in the midst of which will be the knot we speak
of, which must be so straight knit as not to suffer a
drop of blood to squeeze out of the vessels; but care
must be taken not to knit it so straight as to cut it in
two, and therefore the thread must be pretty thick, and
pretty straight knit, it being better too straight than
too loose; for some children have miserably lost their
lives, with all their blood, before it was discovered,
because the navel-string was not well tied. Therefore
great care must be taken that no blood squeeze through,
for if there do, a new knot must be made with the rest of
the string. You need not fear to bind the navel-string
very hard, because they are void of sense, and that part
of it which you leave on falls off of its own accord in a 
very few days, accordingly six or seven, and sometimes
sooner; but rarely tarries longer than the eighth or
ninth. When you have thus cut the navel-string, then take
care the piece that fails off touch not the ground, for
the reason I told you Mizaldus gave, which experience has
justified.

     As to the last thing I mentioned, which is the event
or consequence, or what follows cutting of the navel-
string. As soon as the navel-string is cut off, apply a
little cotton or lint to the place to keep it warm, lest
the cold enter into the body of the child which it will
most certainly do if you have not bound it hard enough.
If the lint or cotton you apply to it he dipped in oil of
roses, it will be the better; and then put another small
rag three or four times double upon the belly. Upon the
top of all put another small bolster, and then swathe it
with a linen swathe four fingers broad, to keep it
steady, lest by rolling too much or by being continually
stirred from side to side, it comes to fall off before
the navel-string, which you left remaining, is fallen
off. It is the usual custom of midwives to put a piece of
burnt rag to it, which we commonly call tinder; but I
would rather advise them to put a little of armoniac in
it, because of its drying quality. But this shall suffice
to be spoken as to the cutting of the navel-string.


     SECT. III. How to bring away the After-burden.

     A WOMAN cannot be said fairly to be delivered,
though the child be born, till the after-burden be also
taken from her; herein differing from most animals, who,
when they have brought forth their young, cast forth
nothing else but some waters, and the membranes which
contained them. But women have an after-labour, which
sometimes proves more dangerous than the first; and how
to bring it safely away, without prejudice to her, shall
be my business to show in this section.

     As soon as the child is born, before the midwife
either lies or cuts the navel-string lest the womb should
close, let her take the string and wind it once or twice
about one or two of the fingers of her left hand joined
together, the better to hold it, with which she may draw
it moderately, and with the right hand she may only take
a single hold of it above the left near the privities,
drawing likewise with that very gently, resting the
while, the fore-finger of the same hand extended and
stretched forth along the string towards the entry of the
vagina; always observing, for the more facility, to draw
it from the side where the burden cleaves least, for in
so doing the rest will separate the better; and special
care must be taken that it be not drawn forth with too
much violence, lest by breaking the string near the
burden, the midwife will be obliged to put the whole hand
into the womb to deliver the woman; and she had need be a
very skilful person that undertakes it, lest the womb, to
which this burden is sometimes very strongly fastened, be
not drawn away with it, as it has sometimes happened. It
is therefore best to use such remedies as may assist
nature. And here take notice, that what brings away the
birth will also bring away the after-birth. And
therefore, for the effecting this work, I will lay down
the following rules:
1. Use the same means in bringing away the after-birth
that you made use of to bring away the birth; for the
same care and circumspection is needful now that was
then.
2. Consider the labouring woman cannot but be much spent
by what she has already undergone in bringing forth the
infant and therefore be sure to take care to give her
something to comfort her. And in this case good jelly
broths, also a little wine and toast in it, and other
comforting things, will be very necessary.
3. A little white hellebore in powder, to make her
sneeze, is in this case very proper.
4. Tansy and the stone Aetites, applied as before
directed, is also of good use in this case.
5. If you take the herb vervain, and either boil it in
wine, or make a syrup with the juice of it, which you may
do by adding to it double its weight of sugar (having
clarified the juice before you boil it), and a spoonful
or two of that given to the woman is very efficacious to
bring away the secundine; and featherfew and mugwort have
the same operation taken as the former.
6. Alexander boiled in wine, and the wine drunk; also
sweet cervile, sweet cicely, angelica roots, and muster-
wort, are excellent remedies in this case.
7. Or if these fail, the smoke of marigolds received up a
woman's privities, by a funnel have been known to bring
away the after-birth, even when the midwife let go her
hold.
8. Which is all I shall add in this case. Boil mugwort in
water till it be very soft; then take it out, and apply
it in manner of a poultice to the navel of a labouring
woman, and it instantly brings away the birth and after-
birth. But special care must be taken to remove it as
soon as they come away, lest by its longer tarrying it
should draw away the womb also. But this much shall
suffice to be spoken of bringing away the after-burden in
all natural labours.


     SECT. IV. Of laborious and difficult Labours, and
how the Midwife is to proceed therein.

     To proceed in this section the more regularly, it
will be necessary to acquaint the reader that there are
three sorts of bad labours, all painful and difficult,
but not all properly unnatural, it will be necessary
therefore to distinguish these.

     The first of these bad labours is that wherein the
mother and child suffer very much by extreme pain and
difficulty even though the child come right; and this is
distinguishably called laborious labour.

     The second is that which is difficult, and differs
not much from the former, except that, besides those
extraordinary pains, it is generally attended with some
unhappy accident, which, by retarding the birth, causes
the difficulty; and these difficulties being removed,
accelerates the birth, and hastens the delivery.

     Some have asked what the reason is that women bring
forth their children with so much pain? I answer, the
sense of feeling is distributed to the whole body by the
nerves, and the mouth of the womb being so straight that
it must of necessity be dilated, at the time of the
woman's delivery, the dilating thereof stretches the
nerves, and from thence comes the pain. And therefore the
reason why some women have more pain in their labour than
others, proceeds from their having the mouth of the
matrix more full of nerves than others, as skilful
anatomists do easily discover.

     But to proceed: The best way to remove these
difficulties that occasion such hard pains and labour as
I am here to treat of, is to show from whence they
proceed; for the cause of any distemper being known is as
much as half the cure. Now the difficulty of labour
proceeds either from the mother, a child, or both.

     From the mother, by reason of the indisposition of
her body, or may be from some particular part only, and
chiefly the womb, as when the woman is weak, and the
mother is not active to expel its burden, or from
weakness or disease, or want of spirits; or it may be
from some strong passion of the mind with which she was
before possessed; it may be also because she may be too
young, and so may have the passages too straight; or too
old, and then, if it be their first child, because her
parts are too dry and too hard, and cannot be so easily
dilated, as happens also to them which are too lean.
Likewise those who are either small, short, or deformed,
as crooked women, who have not a breath strong enough to
help her pains, and to bear them down; and persons that
are crooked having sometimes the bones of the passage not
well shaped; the cholic also hinders labour, by
preventing the true pains; and all great and acute pains,
as when the woman is taken with a violent fever, a great
flooding, frequent convulsions, bloody flux, or any other
great distemper.

     Also excrements retained cause much difficulty, and
so does a stone in the bladder; or when the bladder is
full of urine, without being able to void it; or when the
woman is troubled with great and painful biles. it may
also be from the passages when the membranes are thick,
the orifice too straight, and the neck of the womb is not
sufficiently open, the passages are pressed and strained
by tumours in the adjacent parts, or when the bones are
too firm, and will not open, which very much endangers
mother and child; or when the passes are not slippery, by
reason of the waters having broken so soon, or of the
membranes being too thin. The womb may be also out of
order with respect to its bad situation, or conformation,
having [the] neck too straight, hard, and callous, which
may easily be so naturally, or may come by accident,
being many times caused by a tumour, a posthume ulcer, or
superfluous flush.

     As to hard labour occasioned by the child, it is
when the child happens to stick to a mole, or when it is
so weak it cannot break the membranes, or if it be too
big all over, or in the head only, or if the navel
vessels are twisted about its neck, when the belly is
hydroptical, or when it is monstrous, having two heads,
or being joined to another child; also when the child is
dead, or so weak that it can contribute nothing to its
birth, likewise when it comes wrong, or when there are
two or more. And to all these various difficulties there
is oftentimes one more, and that is the ignorance of the
midwife; for want of understanding her business hinders
nature in her work instead of helping her.

     Having thus looked into the causes of hard labour, I
will now show the industrious midwife how she may
minister some relief to the labouring woman under these
difficult circumstances. But it will require
understanding and judgment in the midwife, when she find
a woman in difficult labour, to know the particular
obstruction, or cause thereof, that so a suitable remedy
may be applied; as, for instance, when it happens by the
mother's being too young and too straight, she must be
gently treated, and the passages anointed with oil, hog's
lard, or fresh butter, to relax and dilate them the
easier, lest there should happen a rupture of any part
when the child is born; for sometimes the peritonaeum
breaks with the skin from the privities to the fundament.
But if a woman be in years with her first child, let her
lower parts be anointed to mollify the inward orifice,
which in such a case being more hard and callous, does
not easily yield to the distension of labour, which is
the true cause why such women are longer in labour, which
is why their children, being forced against the inward
orifice of the womb (which, as I have said, is a little
callous), are born with great bumps and bruises on their
heads. Those women that are very small and misshapen
should not he put to bed, at least till their waters are
broke, but rather kept upright, and assisted to walk
about the chamber, by being supported under her arms; for
by that means they will breathe more freely, and mend
their pains better than on the bed, because there they
lie all on a heap. As for those that are very lean, and
have hard labour from that cause, let them moisten the
parts with oils and ointments, to make them more smooth
and slippery, that the head of the infant and the womb be
not so compassed and bruised by the hardness of the
mother's bones which form the passage. if the cause be
weakness, she ought to be strengthened, the better to
support her pains; to which end give her good jelly
broths, and a little wine with a toast in it. If she
fears her pains, let her be comforted, assuring her that
she will not endure many more, but be delivered in a
little time. But if her pains be slow and small, or none
at all, they must be provoked by frequent and pretty
strong clysters, that so they may be excited thereby;
after which, let her walk about the chamber, that so the
weight of the child may help them forward. But if she
flood, or have convulsions, she must then be helped by a
speedy delivery; the operation whereof I shall relate in
this section of unnatural labours. If she be costive, let
her use clysters, which may also to dispel the cholic, at
those times very injurious, because attended with useless
pains, and because such bear not downward, and so help
not to forward the birth. If she find an obstruction or
stoppage in the urine, by reason the womb is too much on
the bladder, let her lift up her belly a little with her
hand, and try if by that she receives any benefit; if she
finds she does not, it will be necessary to introduce a
catheter into her bladder, and thereby draw forth her
urine. If the difficulty be from the ill posture of the
woman, let her be placed otherwise, in a posture more
suitable and convenient for her; also if it proceed from
the indisposition of the womb, as from its oblique
situation, etc., it must be remedied, as well as it can,
by placing her body accordingly; or, if it be a vicious
conformation, having the neck too hard, too callous, and
too straight, it must he anointed with oils and
ointments, as before directed. If the membranes be so
strong as that the waters do not break in due time, they
may he broken with the fingers, if the midwife be first
well assured that the child is forward in the passage, or
else, by breaking the waters too soon, the child may
remain in danger of remaining dry a long time; to supply
which defect, you may moisten the parts with
fomentations, decoctions, and emollient oils; which is
yet not half so well as when nature does her work in her
own time, with the ordinary slime and water. These
membranes sometimes do press forth with the waters three
or four fingers' breadth out of the body before the
child, resembling a bladder full of water; but there is
then no great danger to break them, if they be not
already broken; for when the case is so, the child is
always in readiness to follow, being in the passage; but
let the midwife be very careful not to pull it with her
hand, lest the after-burden be thereby loosened before
its time, for it adheres thereto very strongly. If the
navel-string happens to come first, it must presently be
put in again, and kept so, if possible, or otherwise the
woman must be immediately delivered. But if the after-
burden should come first it must not be put up again by
any means; for the infant having no further occasion for
it, it would be but an obstacle if it were put up, in
this case it must be cut off, having tied the navel-
string, and afterwards draw forth the child with all the
speed that may be, lest it be suffocated.


     SECT. V. Of Women labouring with a Dead Child.

     When the difficulty of labour arises from a dead
child, it is a case of great danger to the mother, and
great care ought to be taken therein; but before any
thing be done, the midwife ought to be well assured the
child is dead, which may be known by these signs.

     1. The breast suddenly slacks or falls flat or bags
down.

     2. A great coldness possesses the belly of the
mother, especially above the navel.

     3. Her urine is thick, and a filthy stinking settles
at the bottom.

     4. No motion of the child can be perceived; for the
trial whereof, let the midwife put her hands in warm
water, and lay it upon the abdomen; for that, if it is
alive, will make it stir.

     5. She is very subject to dream of dead men, and be
affrighted therewith.

     6. She has extravagant longings to eat such things
as are Contrary to nature.

     7. Her breath stinks, though not used so to do; and
8, When she turns herself in bed the child sways that way
like a lump of lead.

     These things being carefully observed, the midwife
may make a judgment whether the child be alive or dead,
especially if the woman take the following prescription:
"Take half a pint of white wine and burn it, and add
thereto half an ounce of cinnamon, but no other spice
whatever; and when she has drunk it, if her travailing
pains come upon her the child is certainly dead; but if
not the child may possibly be either weak or sick, but
not dead, this will bring her pains upon her if it be
dead, and will refresh the child, if it be living; for
cinnamon refresheth and strengtheneth the child."

     Now, if upon trial, it be found that the child is
dead, let the mother do all she can to forward the
delivery, because a dead child can be nowise helpful
therein. It will be necessary, therefore, that she make
some comforting things to prevent her fainting, by reason
of the putrid vapours ascending from the dead child. And
in order to her delivery, let her take the following
herbs boiled in white wine (or at least as many of them
as you can get): viz., dittany, betony, pennyroyal, sage,
featherfew, centaury, ivy leaves, and berries. Let her
also take sweet basil, in powder, and half a drachm at a
time, in white wine; let her privities be also anointed
with the juice of the garden-tansy. Or take the tansy in
the summer, when it can be most plentifully had, and
before it runs up to the flower, and having bruised it
well, boil it in oil till the juice of it be consumed. If
you set it in the sun after you have mixed it with oil,
it will be more effectual. This an industrious midwife,
who would be prepared against all events, ought to have
always by her. As to the manner of her delivery, the same
method must be used as are mentioned in the section of
natural labour. And here again I cannot but commend the
stone Aetites, held near the privities, whose magnetic
virtue renders it exceedingly necessary on this occasion,
for it draws the child any way, with the same facility
that the lodestone draws iron.

     Let the midwife also make a strong decoction of
hyssop with water, and let the woman drink it very hot,
and it will in a little time bring away the dead child.

     If as soon as she is delivered of the dead child,
you are in doubt that part of the after-birth is left
behind in the body (for in such cases as these, many
times, it rots, and comes away piecemeal), let her
continue drinking the same decoction till her body be
cleansed.

     A decoction made of herb muster-wart, used as you
did the decoction of hyssop, works the same effect. Let
the midwife also take roots of pollodum, and stamp them
well; warm them a little, and bind them on the soles of
her feet, and it will soon bring away the child, either
dead or alive.

     The following medicines likewise are such as stir up
the expulsive faculty; but in this case they must be
stronger, because the motion of the child ceaseth.

     Take savin, round birthwort, trochisks of myrrh,
afaran roots, cinnamon, saffron, each half a drachm; make
a powder, give a drachm.

     Or she may purge first, and then apply an emollient,
anointing her about the womb with oil of lilies, sweet
almonds, camomile, hen and goose-grease. Also foment, to
get out the child, with decoction of mercury, orris, wild
cucumbers, saecus, broom flowers, then anoint the
privities and loins with ointment of sow-bread. Or, take
coloquintida, birth-wort, of each a drachm; make a
powder; add ammoniacum dissolved in wine, ox gall, each
two drachms; with oil of keir make an ointment. Or this
pessary:

     Take birthwort, orris, black hellebore,
coloquintida, myrrh, each a drachm; powdered ammoniacum
dissolved in wine, ox gall, each two drachms. Or make a
fume with an ass's hoof burnt, or gallianum, or castor,
and let it be taken in with a funnel.

     To take away pains, and strengthen the parts, foment
with the decoction of mugwort, mallows, rosemary, with
wood myrtle, St. John's wort, each half an ounce,
spermatic two drachms; deer's suet an ounce; with wax
make an ointment. Or,

     Take wax six ounces, spermaceti an ounce; melt them,
dip flax therein, and lay it all over the abdomen.

     If none of these things will do, the last remedy is
to use surgery, and then the midwife ought without delay
to send for an expert and able man-midwife, to deliver
her by manual operation; of which I shall treat more in
the next chapter.


CHAPTER VI.
OF UNNATURAL LABOUR.

<Illustration: process of delivery.> arist12.jpg

     SECT. I.

     IN showing the duty of a midwife, when the child-
bearing woman's labour is unnatural, it will be requisite
to show, in the first place, what I mean by unnatural
labour; for that women do bring forth children in pain
and sorrow is natural and common to all. Therefore that
which I call unnatural labour is, when the child comes to
the birth in a contrary posture to that which nature
ordained and in which the generality of children come in
to the world.

     The right and natural birth is, when the child comes
with its head first; and yet this is too short a
definition of a natural birth: for if any part of the
head but the crown come first, so that the body follows
not in a straight line, it is a wrong and difficult
birth, even though the head comes first. Therefore, if
the child comes with its feet first, or with the side
across, it is quite contrary to nature, or to speak more
plainly, that which I call unnatural; now there are four
general ways a child may come wrong: the first is, when
any of the fore parts of the body first present
themselves. Secondly, when by an unhappy transposition
any of the hinder parts first present themselves.
Thirdly, when either of the sides; or, fourthly, the feet
present themselves first: to these four, all the
particular and different wrong postures that a child can
present itself in, for the birth may be reduced; and
therefore I shall confine myself herein, to treat only of
these four more generally wrong.


     SECT. II. How to deliver a Woman of a Dead Child by
Manual Operation.

     THE last section of the last chapter was about the
delivering of a woman of a dead child, wherein several
things were directed to be applied in order to facilitate
the delivery; but where all these fail, a manual
operation is absolutely necessary. In order to which, let
the operator acquaint the woman with the absolute
necessity there is of such an operation; and that as the
child has already lost its life, there is no other way
left for the saving of hers; let him also tell her, for
her encouragement, that he doubts not that with the
divine blessing to deliver her safely, and that the pain
arising thereby will not be so great as the fears; and
then let him endeavour to stir up the woman's pains, by
giving her some sharp clyster, to excite her throws to
bear down and bring forth the child; and if this prevail
not, let him proceed with his manual operation.

     First, therefore, let her be placed across the bed
that he may operate the easier, and let her lie on her
back, with her hips a little higher than her head, or at
least the body equally placed, when it is necessary to
put back or turn the infant to give it a better posture:
being thus situated, she must fold her legs so as her
heels be toward her buttocks and her thighs spread, and
held so by a couple of strong persons; there must be
others also to support her under her arms, that the body
may not slide down when the child is drawn forth, for
which sometimes a great strength is required; let the
sheets and blankets cover her thighs for decency's sake,
and with respect to the assistance, and also to prevent
her catching cold; the operator herein governing himself
as well with respect to his convenience, and the facility
and surety of the operation, as to the other things. Then
let him anoint the entrance of the womb with oil or fresh
butter, if it be necessary, that so he may with more ease
introduce his hand which must also be anointed; and
having by signs before mentioned received satisfaction
that it is a dead child, he must do his endeavour to
fetch it away as soon as possibly he can, and if the
child offers the head first, be must gently put it back
until he hath liberty to introduce his hand quite into
the womb; then sliding it along under the belly to find
the feet, let him draw it forth by them, being very
careful to keep the head from being locked in the
passage, and that it be not separated from the body which
may be effected the more easily, because the child being
very rotten and putrefied, the operator is not so mindful
to keep the breast and face downwards as he is in living
births. But if notwithstanding all these precautions, by
reason of the child's putrefaction, the head should be
separated, and left behind in the womb, it must be drawn
forth according to the directions which shall be given in
section 3 of this chapter for that purpose. But when the
head coming first, is so far advanced that it cannot be
well put back, it is better to draw it forth so, than to
torment the woman too much by putting it back to turn it,
and bring it by the feet: but the head being a part round
and slippery, it may so happen that the operator cannot
take hold of it with his fingers by reason of its
moisture, nor put them up to the side of it because the
passage is filled with its bigness, he must take a proper
instrument, and put it up as far as he can without
violence, between  the womb and the child's head,
observing to keep the point of it towards the head (for
the child being dead before, there can be no danger in
the operation), and let him fasten it there, giving it
good hold upon one side of the bones of the skull, that
it may not slide; and after it is well fixed in the head,
he may therewith draw it forth, keeping the ends of the
fingers of his left hand flat upon the opposite side, the
better to help to disengage it, and by wagging it a
little to conduct it directly out of the passage, until 
the head be quite born; and then taking hold of it with
the hands only, the shoulders may be drawn into the
passage, and so sliding the fingers of both hands under
the armpits, the child may be quite delivered; and then
the after-burden fetched, to finish the operation, being
careful not to pluck the navel-string too hard, lest it
break, as often happens when it is corrupted.

     If the dead child comes with the arms up to the
shoulder extremely swelled that the woman must suffer too
great a violence to have it put back, it is then (being
first well assured the child is dead), best to take it
off at the shoulder joints, by twisting three or four
times about, which is very easily done, by reason of the
softness and tenderness of the body; after the arm is so
separated, and no longer possessing the passage, the
operator will have more room to put up his hand into the
womb, to fetch the child by the feet, and bring it away.

     But although the operator be sure the child is dead
in the womb, yet he must not therefore presently use
instruments, because they are never to be used but when
hands are not sufficient, and there is no other remedy to
prevent the woman's danger, or to bring forth the child
any other way. And the judicious operator will choose
that way which is the least hazardous, and most safe.


     SECT. III. How a Woman must be delivered when the
Child's Feet come first.


     THERE is nothing more obvious to those whose
business it is to assist labouring women, than that the
several unnatural postures in which children present
themselves at their births are the occasion of most of
the bad labours and ill accidents that happen unto women
in such a condition.

     And since midwives are very often obliged, because
of the unnatural situations, to draw the children forth
by the feet, I conceive it to be most proper to show
first how a child must be brought forth that presents
itself in that posture, because it will be a guide to
several of the rest.

     I know indeed that in this case it is the advice of
several authors to change the figure, and place the head
so, that it may present the birth: and this counsel I
should be very inclinable to follow, could they but also
show how it must be done. But it will appear very
difficult, if not impossible to be performed, if we would
avoid the dangers that by such violent agitations both
the mother and the child must be put into; and therefore
my opinion is, that it is better to draw it forth by the 
feet, when it presents itself in that posture, than to
venture a Worse accident by turning it.

     As soon therefore as the waters are broken, and it
is known that the child comes thus, and that the womb is
open enough to admit the midwife's or operator's hand
into it, or else by anointing the passages with oil or
hog's grease to endeavour to dilate it by degrees, using
her fingers to this purpose, spreading them one from the
other, after they are together entered and continuing to
do so till it be sufficiently dilated, then taking care
that her nails are well pared, and no rings on her
fingers, and her hands well anointed with oil or fresh
butter, and the woman placed in the manner directed in
the former section, let her gently introduce her hand
into the entry of the womb, where, finding the child's
feet, let her draw it forth in the manner I shall
presently direct; only let her first see whether presents
one foot, or both, and if but one foot, she ought to
consider whether it be the right foot or the left, and
also in what fashion it comes; for by that means she will
soonest come to know where to find the other, which as
soon as she knows and finds, let her gently draw it forth
with the other; but of this she must be especially
careful, viz., that this second be not the foot of
another child; for if so, it be of the most fatal
consequence, for she may sooner split both mother and
child than draw them forth; but this may he easily
prevented if she does but slide her hand up the first leg
and thigh to the waist, and there find both thighs joined
together, and descending from one and the same body. And
this is also the best means to find the other foot when
it comes with but one.

     As soon as the midwife hath found both the child's
feet, she may draw them forth, and holding them together,
may bring them by little and little in this manner,
taking afterwards hold of the legs and thighs as soon as
she can come at them, drawing them so till the hips be
come forth. Whilst this is doing, let her observe to wrap
the parts in a single cloth, that so her hands, being
already greasy, slide not on the infant's body, which is
very slippery, because of the vicious humours which are
all over it, and prevent one's taking good hold of it,
which being done, she may take hold under the hips, so as
to draw it forth to the beginning of the breast; and let
her on both sides with her hand bring down the arms along
the child's body, which she may then easily find; and
then let her take care that the belly and face of the
child  be downwards, for if it should be upwards, there
would be some danger of its being stopped by the chin
over the share-bone; and therefore, if it be not so, must
turn it to that posture; which may he dome easily if she
take hold on the body when the breast and arms are forth
in the manner we have said, and draws it with turning it
in proportion on that side which it most inclines to,
till it be turned with the face downwards, and so having
brought it to the shoulders, let her lose no time,
desiring the woman at the same time to bear down, that so
at drawing, the head at that instant may take its place,
and not be stopped in the passage. Some children there 
are whose heads are so big, that when the whole body is
born yet that stops in the passage, though the midwife
takes all possible care to prevent it. And when this
happens she must not endeavour only to draw forth the
child by the shoulders, lest she sometimes separate the
body from the head, as I have known it done by the
midwife, but she must discharge it by little and little
from the bones in the passage with the fingers of each
hand, sliding them on each side opposite the one to the
other, sometimes above, and sometimes under, until the
work be ended; endeavouring to despatch it as soon as
possible, lest the child be suffocated, as it will
unavoidably be if it should remain long in that posture;
and this being well and carefully effected, she may soon
after fetch away the after-birth, as I have before
directed.


     SECT. IV. How to bring away the Head of the Child
when separated from the body, and left behind in the
Womb.

     THOUGH the utmost care be taken in bringing away the
child by the feet, yet, if the child happens to be dead,
it is sometimes so putrefied and corrupted, that with the
least pull the body separates from the head, and remains
alone in the womb, and cannot be brought away but with a
manual operation and difficulty; so it being slippery, by
reason of the place where it is, and from the roundness
of its figure, on which no hold can be well taken; and so
very great is the difficulty in this case, that sometimes
two or three able practitioners in the art of midwifery
have one after the other left the operation unfinished,
as not able to effect it, after the utmost efforts of
their industry, skill and strength; so that the woman,
not being able to be delivered, perished. To prevent
which fatal accident for the time to come, let the
following operation be observed.

     When the infant's head separates from its body, and
is left alone behind, whether through putrefaction or
otherwise, let the operator immediately, without any
delay, whilst the womb is yet open, direct up his right
hand to the mouth of the head (for no other hole can
there be had), and having found it let him put one or two
of his fingers into it and the thumb under his chin, then
let him draw it by little and little, holding it so by
the jaw; but if that fails, as sometimes it will, when
putrefied, then let him pull forth his right hand, and
slide up his left, with which he must support the head,
and with the right let him take a narrow instrument
called a crotchet; but let it be strong and with a single
branch, which he must guide along the inside of his hand,
with  the point of it towards it for fear of hurting the
womb, and having thus introduced it, let him turn it
towards the head for to strike either into an eye-hole,
or the hole of an ear or behind the head or else between
the stature, as he finds it most convenient and easy; and
then draw forth the head so fastened with the said
instrument, still helping to conduct it with his left
hind; but when he hath brought it near the passage being
strongly fastened to the instrument, let him remember to
draw forth his hand, that the passage not being filled
with it may be the larger and easier, keeping still a
finger or two on the side of the head, the better to
disengage it.

     There is also another way to this, with more ease
and less hardship than the former, which is this: let the
operator take a soft fillet or linen slip of about four
fingers' breadth and the length of three quarters of an
ell or thereabouts, taking the two ends with the left
hand, and the middle with the right, and let him so put
it up with his right as that it may be beyond the head to
embrace it as a sling doth a stone; and afterwards draw
forth the fillet by the two ends together. It will easily
be drawn forth, the fillet not hindering the least
passage, because it takes up little or no place.

     When the head is thus fetched out of the womb, care
must be taken that not the least part of it be left
behind, and likewise to cleanse the woman well of her
after-burden if yet remaining. Some have questioned
whether the child's head yet remaining in the womb, and
the after-birth too, which ought to be brought away
first? The answer to which question may be by way of
distinction that is to say, if the burden be wholly
separated from the sides of the womb that ought to be
first brought away, because if it still adheres to the
womb, it must not be meddled with till the head be
brought away; for if one should then go about to separate
it from the womb, it might then cause a flooding, which
would be augmented by the violence of the operation; the
vessels to which it is joined remaining for the most part
open as long as the womb is distended. which the head
causeth while it is retained in it, and cannot close till
this strange body be avoided, and then it doth by
contraction and compressing itself together, as has been
before more fully explained. Besides the after-birth
remaining thus cleaving to the womb during the operation,
prevents it from receiving easily either bruise or hurt.


     SECT. V. How to deliver a Woman when the side of the
Child's Head is presented to the Birth.

     THOUGH some may think it a natural labour when the
child's head may come first, but yet if the child's head
presents not the right way, even that is an unnatural
labour; and therefore, though the head comes first, yet,
if it be the side of the head instead of the crown, it is
very dangerous both to the mother and child, for the
child may sooner break its neck than be born in that
manner; and by how much the mother's pains continue to
bear the child, which it is impossible unless the head be
rightly placed, the more the passages are stopped;
therefore, as soon as the position of the child is known
the woman must be laid with all speed, lest the child
should advance further in this vicious posture, and
therefore render more difficult to thrust it back, which
must be done in order to place the head in the passage
right as it ought to be.

     To this purpose therefore place the woman so that
her hips may be a little higher than her head and
shoulders, causing her to lean  a little upon the
opposite pick to the child's ill posture; then let the
operator slide up his hand, well anointed with oil, by
the side of the child's head, to bring it right, gently
with his fingers between the head and the womb; but if
the head be so engaged that it cannot be done that way,
he must then put up his hand up to the shoulders, that so
by thrusting them back a little into the womb, sometimes
on the one side and sometimes on the other, he may by
little and little give it a natural position. I confess
it would be better if the operator could put back the
child by its shoulders with both hands; but the head
takes up so much room that he will find much ado to put
up one, with which he must perform his operation with the
help of the finger ends of the other hand, put forward
the child's birth as when the labour is natural.

     Some children present their face first, having their
heads turned back, in which posture it is extremely
difficult that a child should be born; and if it continue
so long, the face will be swelled, and withal black and
blue, that it will at first seem monstrous, which is
occasioned as well by the compression of it in that place
as by the midwife's fingers handling it too readily, in
order to place it in a better posture, but this blackness
will wear away in three or four days' time, anointing it
often with oil of sweet almonds. To deliver the birth,
the same operation must be used as in the former, when
the child comes first with the side of the head; only let
the midwife or operator work very gently to avoid as much
as possible the bruising of the face.


     SECT. VI. How to deliver a Woman when a Child
presents one or both hands together with the Head.

     SOMETIMES the infant will present some other part
together with its head, which if it does, it is usually
one or both hands; and this hinders the birth, because
the hands take up part of that passage which is little
enough for the head alone; besides that, when this
happens, they generally cause the head to lean on one
side; and therefore this position may be very well styled
unnatural. When the child presents itself thus, the first
thing to be done, after it is perceived, must be to
prevent it from coming down more, or engaging further in
the passage, and therefore the operator, having placed
the woman on the bed with her head a little lower than
her hips, must put and guide back the infant's hand with
his own as much as may be, or both of them, if they both
come down, to give way to the child's head, and this
being done, if the head be on one side, it must be
brought into its natural posture in the middle of the
passage, that it may come in a straight line, and then
proceed as directed in the forgoing section.


     SECT. VII. How a Woman is to be delivered when the
Hands or Feet of the Infant come together.

     THERE is none but will readily grant, that when the
hands and feet of an infant present together, the labour
must be unnatural because it is impossible a child should
be born in that manner. In this, therefore, when the
midwife guides her hand towards the orifice of the womb
she will perceive only many fingers close together; and
if it be not sufficiently dilated, it will be a good
while before the hands and feet will be exactly
distinguished; for they are sometimes so shut and pressed
together that they seem to be all of one and the same
shape; but where the womb is open enough to introduce the
hand into it, she will easily know which are the hands
and which are the feet; and having well taken notice
thereof, let her slide up her hand; and presently direct
it towards the infant's breast; which she will find very
near, and then let her very gently thrust back the body
towards the bottom of the womb, leaving the feet in the
same place where she found them; and then having paced
the woman in a convenient posture, that is, to lay her
hips a little raised above her breast and head (which
situation should always be observed when the child is to
be put back into the womb), let the midwife afterwards
take hold of the child by the feet, and draw it forth, as
is directed in the second section.

     This labour, though somewhat troublesome, yet is
much better than when the child presents only its hands;
for the child must be quite turned about before it can be
drawn forth; but in this they are ready, presenting
themselves; and in this there is not much to do, but to
lift and thrust back a little the upper part of the body,
which is almost done of itself by drawing it alone by the
feet.

     I confess there are many authors that have written
of labours who would have all wrong births reduced to a
natural figure; which is, to turn it, that it may come
with the head first; but those that have written thus are
such as never understood the practical part, for if they
had the least experience herein, would know that it is
very often impossible, at least, if it were to be done,
that violence must necessarily be used in doing it, that
would very probably be the death of mother and child in
the operation. I would therefore lay down, as a general
rule, that whensoever an infant presents itself wrong to
the birth, in what posture soever from the shoulders to
the feet, it is the best way, and soonest done, to draw
it out by the feet: and that it is better searching for
them if they do not present themselves, rather than try
to put it in the natural posture, and place the head
foremost; for the great endeavours necessary to be used
in turning the infant in the womb do so much weaken both
mother and child, that there remains not afterwards
strength enough to commit the operation to the work of
nature; for usually the woman hath no more throws or
pains fit for labour after she has been so wrought upon;
for which reason it would be very difficult and tedious
at best; and the child, by such an operation made very
weak, would be in extreme danger of perishing before it
could be born. It is therefore much better in these cases
to bring it away immediately by the feet; searching for
them, as I have already directed, when they do not
present themselves; by which the mother will be prevented
of a tedious labour, and the child be often brought alive
into the world, who otherwise would hardly escape from
death. And thus much shall suffice to be said of
unnatural labours; for, by the rule already given, a
skilful artist will know how to proceed in any posture in
which the child shall present itself.


     SECT. VIII. How a Woman should be delivered that has
Twins, which present themselves in different Postures.
<illustration: position of embryos in a plural
conception> arist13.jpg

     WE have already spoken something of the birth of
twins in the chapter of natural labour; for it is not an
unnatural labour merely to have twins, provided they come
in a right position to the birth. But when they shall
present themselves in divers postures, they come properly
under the denomination of unnatural labours; and if when
one child presents itself in a wrong figure, it makes the
labour dangerous and unnatural, it must needs make it
much more so when there are several, and render it not
only more painful to the mother and children, but to the
operator also, for they often trouble each other, and
hinder both their births; besides which the womb is then
so filled with them, that the operator can hardly
introduce his hand without much violence, which he must
do, if they are to be turned or thrust back, to give them
a better position.

     When a woman is pregnant with two children, they
rarely present to the birth together, the one being
generally more forward than the other, and that is the
reason that but one is felt; and that many times the
midwife knows not there are twins till the first is born,
and that she is going to fetch away the afterbirth. In
the fifth chapter, wherein I treated of natural labour, I
showed how a woman should be delivered of twins,
presenting themselves both right; and, therefore, before
I close this chapter of unnatural labour, it only remains
that I show what ought to be done, when they either both
come wrong, or one of them only, as for the most part it
happens; the first generally coming right, and the second
with the feet foremost, or in some worse posture. In such
a case, the birth of the first must be hastened as much
as possible to make way for the second, which is best
brought away by the feet, without endeavouring to place
it right, even though it was somewhat inclining towards
it, because it has been already tired and weakened by the
birth of the first as well as its mother, that there
would be greater danger of its death than likelihood of
its coming out of the womb that way.

     But if, when the first is born naturally, the second
should likewise offer its head to the birth, it would be
then best leaving nature to finish what she has so well
begun; and it nature should be too slow in her work, some
of those things mentioned in the fourth chapter to
accelerate the birth may be properly enough applied: and
if, after that, the second birth should be yet delayed,
let a manual operation be deferred no longer; but the
woman properly placed, as has been before directed, let
the operator direct his hand gently into the womb to find
the feet, and so draw forth the second child which will
be the more easily effected, because there is way made
sufficient by the birth of the first; and if the waters
of this second child be not broken, as it often happens,
yet intending to bring it by the feet, he need not
scruple to break the membranes with his fingers: for
though, when the birth of a child is left to the
operation of nature, it is necessary that the waters
should break of themselves, yet when the child is brought
out of the womb by art, there is no danger in breaking of
them; nay, on the contrary, it becomes necessary: for
without the waters are broken it would be almost
impossible to turn the child.

     But herein principally lies the care of the operator
that he is deceived, when either the hands or feet of
both children offer themselves together to the birth; In
this case he ought to consider the operation, as whether
they be not joined together, or any way monstrous; and
which part belongs to one child and which to the other,
that so they may be fetched one after the other, and not
both together, as might be, if it were not duly
considered, taking the right foot of the one and the left
of the other, and so drawing them together, as if they
both belonged to one body, because there is a left and a
right by which means it would be impossible ever to
deliver them. But a skilful operator will easily prevent
this, if having found two or three feet of several
children, presenting together in a passage, and taking
aside two of the forwardest, a right and a left, and
sliding his band along the legs and thighs up to the
twist, if forwards, or the buttocks, if backwards, he
find they both belong to one body; of which being thus
assured, he may begin to draw forth the nearest, without
regarding which is the strongest or weakest, bigger or
less, living or dead, having first put a little aside
that part of the other child which offers to have the
more way, and so despatch the first, whenever it is, as
soon as may be, observing the same rules as if there were
but one, that is, keeping the breast and face downwards,
with every circumstance directed in that section where
the child comes with its feet first; and not fetch the
burthen till the second child is born. And therefore,
when the operator hath drawn forth one child, he must
separate it from the burden, having tied and cut the
navel-string, and then fetch the other by the feet in the
same manner, and afterward bring away the after-burden
with the two strings, as hath been before showed. If the
children present any other part than the feet, the
operator may follow the same method as is directed in the
foregoing section, where the several unnatural positions
are fully treated of.


CHAPTER VIII.
DIRECTIONS FOR CHILD-BEARING WOMEN IN THEIR LYING-IN.


     IN the fourth, fifth and six chapters, we have
treated at large of women's labour, and how they may be
safely delivered both in natural and unnatural labours.
Having therefore thus brought a good woman to bed, I will
in this chapter direct how she ought to be ordered in her
lying-in.


     SECT. II. How a Woman newly delivered ought to be
ordered.

     As soon as she is laid in her bed, let her be placed
in it conveniently for ease and rest, which she stand in
great need of, to recover herself of the great fatigue
she underwent during her travail; and that she may lie
the more easily, let her head and body be a little
raised, that she may breathe more freely, and cleanse the
better, especially of that blood which then comes away,
that so it may not clot, which being retained causeth
very great pain.

     Having thus placed her in bed, let her drink a
draught of burnt white wine, when you have first melted
therein a dram of spermaceti. The herb vervain is also a
most singular herb for a woman in this condition, boiling
it in what she either eats or drinks, fortifying the womb
so exceedingly, that it will do it more good in two days,
having no offensive taste, though very pleasant virtues.
And this is no more than what she stands in need of, for
her lower parts being greatly distended to the birth of
the infant, it is good to endeavour the prevention of an
inflammation there. Let there be also outwardly applied
all over the bottom of the belly and the privities the
following anodyne or cataplasm: Take two ounces of oil of
sweet almonds, and two or three new laid eggs, yolk and
whites, stirring them together in an earthen pipkin over
hot embers, till it comes to the consistence of a
poultice; which being spread upon a cloth, must be
applied to those parts indifferently warm, having first
taken away the closures (which were put to her presently
after her delivery), and likewise such clots of blood as
were then left. Let this lie on five or six hours, and
then renew it again as you see cause.

     Great care ought to be taken at first, that if her
body be very weak, she be not kept too hot, for extremity
of heat weakens nature and dissolves the strength; and
whether she be weak or strong, be sure that no cold air
come near her at first, for cold is an enemy to the
spermatic parts, and if it gets into the womb it
increases the after-pains, causes swellings in the womb,
and hurts the nerves. As to her diet, let it be hot, and
let her eat but little at a time. Let her avoid the light
for the three first days and longer if she be weak, for
her labour weakens her eyes exceedingly, by a harmony
between the womb and them. Let her also avoid great
noise, sadness, and trouble of mind.

     If the womb be foul, which may be easily perceived
by the impurity of the blood (which will then either come
away in clots or stinking, or if you suspect any of the
after-burden to be left behind, which may sometimes
happen), make her drink of featherfew, mugwort,
pennyroyal, and mother of thyme, boiled in white wine,
sweetened with sugar.

     Panady and new laid eggs is the best meat for her at
first, of which she may eat often, but not too much at a
time.

     And let her nurse use cinnamon in all her meats and
drinks, for it is a great strengthener to the womb.

     Let her stir as little as may be till after the
fifth, sixth, or seventh days of her delivery, if she be
weak. And let her talk as little as may be, for that
weakens her.

     If she goes not well to stool, give a clyster made
only with the decoction of mallows and a little brown
sugar.

     When she hath lain a week or something more, let her
use such things as close the womb, of which knot grass
and comfrey are very good; and to them you may add a
little polipodium, for it will do her good, both leaves
and roots being bruised.


     SECT. III. How to remedy those accidents which a
Lying-in Woman is subject to.

     I. The first common and usual accident that troubles
women in their lying-in is after-pains; about the cause
whereof physicians make no small stir, some affirming one
thing to be the cause, and some another: but it is most
certain that they proceed from cold and wind contained in
the bowels, with which they are easily filled after
labour, because there they have more room to dilate than
when the child was in the womb, by which they were
compressed; and also because nourishment and matter
contained as well in them as in the stomach, have been so
confusedly agitated from side to side during the pains of
labour, by the throws which always must compress the
belly, that they could not be well digested, whence this
wind is afterwards generated, and by consequence the
gripes which the woman feels running into her belly from
side to side, according as the wind moves more or less,
and sometimes likewise from the womb, because of the
compression and commotion which the bowels make: These
being generally the cause, let us now apply a suitable
remedy.

     1. Boil an egg soft, and pour out the yolk of it,
with which mix a spoonful of cinnamon water, and let her
drink it; and if you mix in it two grains of ambergrease
it will be the better; and yet vervain taken in any thing
she drinks will be as effectual as the other.

     2. Give the lying-in woman, immediately after
delivery, oil of sweet almonds and syrup of maiden-hair
mixed together. Some prefer oil of walnuts, provided it
be made of nuts that are very good, but tastes worse than
the other at the best. This will lenify the inside of the
intestines by its unctuousness, and by that means bring
away that which is contained in them more easily.

     3. Take and boil onions very well in water, then
stamp them with oil and cinnamon, and seed in powder;
spread them upon a cloth, and apply them to the region of
the womb.

     4. Let her be careful to keep her belly very hot,
and not to drink too cold; and, if they prove very
violent, hot cloths from time to time must be laid to her
belly, or a pancake fried in walnut oil may be applied to
it without swathing her belly too straight. And for the
better evacuating the wind out of the intestines, give
her a clyster, which may be repeated as often as
necessity requires.

     5. Take bay berries, beat them to powder, put the
powder upon a chafing-dish of coals, and let her receive
the smoke of them up her privities.

     6. Take tar and barrows grease, of each an equal
quantity, boil them together, and whilst it is boiling,
add a little pigeon's dung to it. Spread some of this
upon a linen cloth, and apply it to the reins of the back
of her that is troubled with after-pains, and it will
give her speedy ease.

     Lastly, let her take half a dram of bay berries
beaten into a powder in a draught of muscadel or tent.


     II. Another accident to which women in child-bed are
subject is, the haemorrhoids, or piles, occasioned
through their great straining in bringing the child into
the world. To cure this,

     1. Let her be let blood in the vein caphaena.

     2. Let her use polypodium in her meat and drink,
bruised and boiled.

     3. Take an onion, and having made a hole in the
middle of it, fill it full of oil, roast it, and having
bruised it all together, apply it to the fundament.

     4. Take a dozen of snails without shells, if you can
get them, or else so many shell snails, and put them out,
and having bruised them with a little oil, apply them
warm to the fundament.

     5. Take as many wood-lice as you can get, and bruise
them, and having mixed them with a little oil, apply them
warm as before.

     6. If she go well to stool, let her take an ounce of
cassia fistula drawn at night going to bed; she needs no
change of diet after.


     III. Retention of the menstrues is another accident
happening to women in child-bed; and which is of so
dangerous a consequence, that, if not timely remedied, it
proves mortal. Where this happens,

     1. Let the woman take such medicines as strongly
provoke the terms, and such are dittany, betony,
pennyroyal, savory, feverfew, centaury, juniper berries,
peony roots.

     2. Let her take two or three spoonfuls of briony
water each morning.

     3. Gentian roots beaten into a powder, and a dram of
them taken every morning in wine, is an extraordinary
remedy.

     4. The roots of birthwort, either long or round, so
used and taken as the former, is very good.

     5. Take twelve peony seeds, and beat them into very
fine powder, and let her drink them in a draught of hot
cardus posset, and let her sweat after. And if this last
medicine don't bring them down the first time she takes
it, let her take as much more three hours after, and it
seldom fails.


     IV. Overflowing of the menstrues is another accident
incidental to child-bed women.

     1. Take shepherd's purse, either boiled in any
convenient liquor, or dried and beaten into powder, and
it will be an admirable remedy to stop them, this being
especially appropriate to the privities.

     2. The flowers and leaves of bramble, or either of
them, being dried and beaten into powder, and a dram of
them taken every morning in a spoonful of red wine or in
a decoction of the leaves of the same (which perhaps is
much better), is an admirable remedy for the immoderate
flowing of the terms in women.


     V. Excoriations, bruises, and rents of the lower
part of the womb, are often occasioned by the violent
distention and separation of the four curuncles in a
woman's labour. For the healing whereof,

     As soon as the woman is laid, if there be only
simple contusions and excoriations, then let the anodyne
cataplasm, formerly directed be applied to the lower
parts, to ease the pain, made of the yolks and whites of
new laid eggs, and oil of roses boiled a little over warm
embers, continually stirring it till it be equally mixed,
and then spread upon a fine cloth; it must be applied
very warm to the bearing place for five or six hours, and
when it is taken away, lay some fine rags dipped in oil
of St. John's wort, on each side of the bearing place, or
let the part excoriated be anointed with oil of St.
John's wort twice or thrice a day; also foment the parts
with barley-water and honey of roses to cleanse them from
excrements which pass. When the woman makes water, let
them be defended with fine rags, and thereby hinder the
urine from causing smart or pain.


     VI. The curdling and clotting of the milk is another
accident that often happens to women in child-bed; for in
the beginning of child-bed the woman's milk is not
purified because of the great commotions her body
suffered during her labour, which affected all the parts,
and it is then mixed with many other humours. Now this
clotting of milk does for the most part proceed from the
breasts not being fully drawn, and that either because
she hath too much milk, and that the infant is too small
and weak to suck all, or because she doth not desire to
be a nurse, for the milk in those cases remaining in the
breast after concoction without being drawn, loseth the
sweetness and the balsamatic quality it had, and by
reason of the heat it acquires, and the too long stay it
makes there, it sours, curdles, and clots, in like manner
as we see rennet put into ordinary milk turns it into
curds. This curdling of the milk may be also caused by
having taken a cold, and not keeping the breast well
covered.

     But from what causes soever, this curdling of the
milk proceeds, the most certain remedy is, speedily to
draw the breasts until they are emitted and dried. But in
regard to the infant, by reason of weakness it cannot
draw strong enough, the woman being hard marked when her
milk is curdled, it will be most proper to get another
woman to draw her beasts until the milk comes and then
she may give her child suck. And that she may not
afterwards be troubled with a surplus of milk, she must
eat such diet as gives but little nourishment, and that
she keep her body open.

     But if the case be such that the woman neither can
nor will be a nurse, it is then necessary to apply other
remedies for the curing of this distemper. For then it
will be best not to draw her breast, for that will be the
way to draw more milk into them; for which purpose it
will be necessary to empty the body by bleeding in the
arm; besides which, let the humours be drawn down by
strong clysters and bleeding in the foot, nor will it be
amiss to purge gently; and to digest, dissolve, and
dissipate the curdled milk, apply the cataplasm of pure
honey or that of the sour brains dissolved in a decoction
of sage, milk smallage, and fennel, mixing with it oil of
camomile, with which oil let the breasts be also well
anointed. This following liniment is also good to scatter
and dissipate the milk.

A Liniment to scatter and dissipate the Milk.

     That the milk flowing back to the breasts may
without offence be dissipated, you must use this
ointment: "Take pure wax two ounces, or linseed oil half
a pound; when the wax is melted, let the liniment be
made, wherein linen cloths must be dipped, and according
to their largeness, be laid upon the breast; and when it
shall be discussed and pains no more, let other linen
cloths be dipped in the distilled water of acorns, and
put upon them."

     Note, that the cloths dipped in the distilled water
of acorns must be used only by these that cannot nurse
their own children; but if a swelling in the breasts of
them which gave suck do arise from abundance of milk, and
threatens an inflammation, let them use the former
ointment, but abstain from using the distilled water of
acorns.


CHAPTER VIII.
DIRECTIONS FOR NURSES IN ORDERING NEW-BORN CHILDREN.

HAVING in the former chapter shown how the lying-in woman
should be ordered, it is now high time to take care of
the infant; to whom the first service that should be
performed for it is the cutting of the navel-string, of
which I have spoken at large before.


     SECT. I. What is to be done to the new born infant
after cutting the Navel-string.

     WHEN the child's navel-string hath been cut
according to the rules before prescribed, let the midwife
presently cleanse it from the excrements and filth it
brings into the world with it; of which some are within
the body, as the urine in the bladder, and the excrement
found in the guts; and others without, which are thick
and  whitish, and clammy, proceeding from the sliminess
of the waters; there are children sometimes so covered
all over with this that one would say they were rubbed
over with soft cheese, and some women are of so easy a
belief that they really think it so, because they had
eaten some while they were with child. From these
excrements let the child be cleansed with wine and water
a little warmed, washing every part therewith, but
chiefly the head, because of the hair, also the folds of
the groins, armpits, and the cods or privities; which
parts must be gently cleansed with a linen rag, or a soft
sponge dipped in this luke-warm wine. If this clammy or
viscous excrement stick so close that it will not be
easily washed off from those places, it may be fetched
off with oil of sweet almonds or a little fresh butter
melted with wine, and afterwards well dried off; she must
also make tents of fine rags, and, wetting them in this
liquor, clear the ears and nostrils; but for the ears,
wipe them only with a dry soft rag, not dipping it in the
wine, lest it should make them smart.

     The child being thus washed and cleansed from its
native blood and impurities which attended it into the
world, it must in the next place be searched to see
whether all things be right about it, and that there is
no fault or dislocation; whether its nose be straight or
its tongue tied, or whether there be any bruise or tumour
of the head, or whether the mold be not overshotten; also
whether the scrotum (in case it be a boy) be not blown up
and swelled; and, in short, whether it has suffered
violence by its birth in any part of its body, and
whether all the parts be well and duly shaped, that
suitable remedies may be applied if any thing be not
found right. Nor is it enough to see that all be right
without, and that the outside of the body be cleansed,
but she must chiefly observe whether it dischargeth the
excrements contained within, and whether the passages he
open, for some have been born without having them
perforated; therefore, let her examine whether the
conduits of the urine and stool be clear, for want of
which some have died, not being able to void their
excrements because timely care was not taken at first. As
to the urine, all children as well males as females, do
make water as soon as they are born if they can,
especially when they feel the heat of the fire, and
sometimes also the excrements, but not so soon as the
urine. if the infant does not ordure the first day, then
put up into its fundament a small suppository, to stir it
up to be discharged, that it may not cause painful gripes
by remaining so long in its belly. A sugar almond may be
proper for this purpose, anointed over with a little
boiled honey; or else a small piece of Castile soap
rubbed over with fresh butter; she may also give the
child for this purpose a little syrup of roses or violets
at the mouth, mixed with some oil of sweet almonds drawn
without a fire, anointing the belly also with the same
oil or a little fresh butter.

     The midwife having thus washed and cleansed the
child, according to the before-mentioned directions, let
her begin to swaddle it in swathing-cloths, and when she
dresses the head, let her put small rags behind the ears
to dry up the filth which usually engenders there, and so
let her do also in the folds of the armpits and groins,
and so swathe it, having wrapped it up warm in beds and
blankets, which there is scarce any woman so foolish but
knows well enough how to do, only let me give them this
caution, that they swathe not the child too straight in
its blankets, especially about the breast and stomach,
that it may breathe the more freely, and not he forced to
vomit up the milk it sucks, because the stomach cannot be
sufficiently extended to contain it; therefore let its
arms and legs be wrapped in its bed, stretched and
straight, and swathed to keep them so, viz., the arms
along the sides, and its legs equally both together, with
a little of the bed between them, that they may not he
galled by rubbing each other; then let the head be kept
steady and straight with a stay fastened on each side the
blanket, and then wrap the child up in mantles and
blankets to keep it warm. Let none think this of swathing
the infant is needless to set down, for it is necessary
it should be thus swaddled, to give its little body a
straight figure, which is most decent and proper for a
man, and to accustom him to keep upon his feet, who
otherwise would go upon all four, as most other animals
do.


CHAPTER IX.
[Of Distempers of New-Born Children]


     IN new born children there are so many distempers
they are subject to, that daily experience shows us there
are not above half the children that are born which live
till they are three years old; which is occasioned, as
well because of the tenderness of their bodies as the
feebleness of their age, which hinders them from
expressing the inconvenience they labour under, any
otherwise than by their cries. The business of this
chapter therefore shall be to discover the indispositions
to which they are subject, with the remedies proper for
them.


     SECT. I. Of Gripes and Pains in the Bellies of young
Children.

     THIS I mention first, as it is often the first and
most common distemper which happens to little infants
after their birth, many children being so troubled and
pained therewith, that it causes them to cry night and
day, and at last to die of it. The cause of it for the
most part comes from the sudden change of their
nourishment; for having always received it from the
umbilical vessels whilst in their mother's womb, they
come on a sudden to change not only the manner of
receiving it, but the nature and quality of what they
receive as soon as they are born; for instead of
putrefied blood only, which was conveyed to them by means
of the umbilical vein only, they are now obliged to be
nourished with their mother's milk, which they suck with
their mouths, and from which are engendered many
excrements, causing gripes and pains, and that not only
because it is not so pure as the blood with which it was
nourished in the womb, but because the stomach and
intestines cannot yet make a good digestion, being
unaccustomed to it. It is also caused sometimes by a
rough phlegm, and sometimes by worms, for physicians
affirm that worms have been bred in children even in
their mother's belly.

     The remedy therefore must be suited according to the
cause. If it proceed from the too sudden changes of
nourishment, the remedy must be to forbear giving the
child suck for some days, lest the milk be mixed with
phlegm, which is then in the stomach corrupt; and at
first it must suck but little, until it be accustomed to
digest it. If it be the excrements in the intestines,
which by their long stay increase these pains, give them
at the mouth a little oil of sweet almonds and syrup of
roses; if it be worms, lay a cloth dipped in oil of
wormwood, mixed with ox-gall, upon the belly; or a small
cataplasm, mixed with the powder of rue, wormwood,
coloquintida, aloes, and the seeds of citron,
incorporated with ox-gall, and the powder of lupines. Or
give it oil of sweet almonds, with sugar candy, and a
scruple of aniseed; it purgeth new born babes from green
choler and stinking phlegm; and if it be given with
sugar-pap, it allays the griping pains of the belly. Also
anoint the belly with oil of dill, or pelitory stamp,
with oil of camomile, to the belly.


     SECT. II. Of Weakness In new born Infants.

     WEAKNESS is an accident that many children bring
into the world along with them, and is often occasioned
by the Labour of the mother; by the violence and length
whereof they suffer so much that they are born with great
weakness, and many times it is difficult to know whether
they are alive or dead, their body appearing so
senseless, and their faces so blue and livid, that they
seem to be quite choked; and even after some hours, their
showing any signs of life is attended with so much
weakness, that it looks like a return from death, and
that they are still upon the borders of this kingdom.

     In this case, the best way to help the infant is to
lay him speedily in a warm bed and blankets, and carry
him to the fire, and then let the midwife sup a little
wine, and spout it into his mouth, repeating it often if
there be occasion. Let her apply linen to the breast and
belly dipped in wine, and let the face be uncovered, that
he may breathe the more freely; also let the midwife keep
its mouth a little open, cleanse the nostrils with small
linen tents dipped in white wine, that so he may receive
the smell of it, and let her chafe every part of his body
well with warm cloths, to bring back the blood and
spirits, which being retired inwards, through weakness,
often puts him in danger of being choked. By the
application of these means the infant will insensibly
recover strength, and begin to stir his limbs by degrees,
and at length to cry, which, though it be but weakly at
first, yet afterwards, as he breathes more freely, will
cry stronger and stronger.


     SECT. III. Of the Fundament being closed up in a new
Born
Infant.

     ANOTHER defect that new born infants are liable to
is, to have their fundaments closed up, by means whereof
they can neither evacuate the new excrements engendered
by the milk they suck, nor that which was amassed in
their intestines whilst in their mother's belly, which is
certainly mortal without a speedy remedy. There have been
some female children who have had their fundament quite
closed, and yet have avoided the excrements of the guts
by an orifice, which nature to supply that defect had
made within the neck of the womb.

     For the cure or remedy of this, we must take notice
that the fundament is closed two ways; either by a single
skin, through which one may discover some black and blue
marks, proceeding from the excrements retained, which, if
one touch with the finger, there is a softness felt
therein, and thereabout it ought to be pierced; or else
it is quite stopped by a thick fleshy substance, in such
sort that there appears nothing without by which its true
situation may be known. When there is nothing but the
single skin which makes the closure, operation is very
easy, and the children may do very well; for then an
aperture or opening may be made with a small incision
knife crossways, that it may the better receive a round
form, and that the place may not afterwards grow
together, taking great care not to prejudice the
sphincter, or muscle of the Rectum. The incision being
thus made, the excrements will certainly have issue. But
if by reason of their long stay in the belly, they are
become so dry that the infant cannot void them, then let
a small clyster be given to moisten and bring them away;
afterwards put a linen tent into the new made fundaments,
which at first had best be anointed with honey of roses,
and towards the end with a drying cicatrizing ointment,
such as Unguentum Album, or Pomphilix, observing to
cleanse the infant of his excrements, and dry it again as
soon and as often as he evacuates them, that so the
apertion may be prevented from returning into a malignant
ulcer.

     But now if the fundament be stopped up in such a
manner that neither mark nor appearance can be either
seen or felt, then the operation is much more difficult;
and even when it is done, the danger is much more of the
infant's escaping it. And then if it be a female, and
that it sends forth its excrements by the way I have
mentioned before, it be better not to meddle, than, by
endeavouring to remedy an inconvenience, run an extreme
hazard of the infant's death. But when there is no vent
for the excrements, without which death is unavoidable,
there the operation is justifiable.
The operation in this case must be thus: Let the
operator, with a small incision knife that hath but one
edge, enter into the void place, and turning the backs of
it upwards within half a finger's breadth of the child's
rump, which is the place where he will certainly find the
intestine, let him thrust it forward, that it may be open
enough to give free vent to the matters there contained,
being especially careful of the sphincter; after which,
let the wound be dressed according to the manner
directed.


     SECT. IV. Of the Thrush, or Ulcers in the Mouth of
an Infant.

     THE thrush is a distemper that children are very
often subject to, and it arises from bad milk, or from
foul humours in the stomach; for sometimes, though there
be no ill quality in the milk itself, yet it may corrupt
in the child's stomach because of its weakness, or some
other indisposition, in which, acquiring an acrimony
instead of being well digested, there arise from thence
biting vapours, which forming a thick viscosity, do
thereby produce this distemper. It is often difficult, as
physicians tell us, because it is seated in hot and moist
places, where the putrefaction is easily augmented, and
for that the remedies supplied cannot lodge there, being
soon washed away with spittle. But if they arise from too
hot a quality in the nurse's milk, care must be taken to
temper and cool, prescribing her cool diet, bleeding and
purging her also, if there he occasion.

     Take lentils husked, powder them, and lay it upon
the child's gums: or take melidium in flower, half an
ounce, and with oil of roses make a liniment. Also wash
the child's mouth with barley and plantain water, and
honey of roses, or syrup of dry roses, mixing with them a
little verjuice, or juice of lemons, as well to loosen
and cleanse the vicious humours which cleave to the
inside of the child's mouth as to cool those parts which
are already over-heated. This may be done by means of a
small fine rag fastened to the end of a little stick, and
dipped therein, wherein the ulcers may be gently rubbed,
being careful not to put the child to too much pain, lest
an inflammation make the distemper worse. The child's
body must be also kept open, that the humours being
carried to the lower parts, the vapours may not ascend,
as it is usual for them to do when the body is costive
and the excrements too long retained. If the ulcers
appear malignant, let such remedies be used as do their
work speedily, that the equal qualities that cause them
being thereby instantly corrected, their malignity may be
prevented; and in this case touch the ulcers with
plantain water sharpened with the spirits of vitriol, for
the remedy must be made sharp, according to the malignity
the distemper. It will not be unnecessary to purge these
ill humours out of the whole habit of the child by giving
half an ounce of succory with rhubarb.


     SECT. V. Of Pains in the Ears, Inflammation,
Moisture, etc.

     THE brain in infants is very moist, and hath many
excrements which nature cannot send out at its proper
passages: they get often to the ears, and there cause
pains, flux of blood, with inflammation, and matter with
pain; as in children is hard to be known having no other
way to make it known but by constant crying; you will
also perceive them ready to feel their ears themselves,
but will not let the other touch them if they could help
it; and sometimes you may discern the parts about the
ears to be very red.

     These pains, if let alone, are of dangerous
consequences, because they may bring forth watching and
epilepsy, for the moisture breeds worms there, as fouls
the spongy bones, and by degrees incurable deafness.

     To prevent all those ill consequences, allay the
pain with all convenient speed, but have a care of using
strong remedies. Therefore only use warm milk about the
ears, with the decoction of poppy tops, or oil of
violets; to take away the moisture, the honey of roses,
and let aquamellis be topped into the ears; or take
virgin's honey half an ounce, red wine two ounces, alum,
saffron, saltpetre, each a dram mix them at the fire; or
drop in hempseed oil with a little Wine.


     SECT. VI. Of Redness and Inflammation of the
Buttocks, Groin, and Thighs of a young Child.

     IF there be not great care taken to change and wash
the child's bed as soon as it is fouled with the
excrements, and to keep the child very clean, the
acrimony will be sure to cause redness, and beget a
smarting in the buttocks, groin, and thighs of the child,
which, by reason of the pain, will afterwards be subject
to inflammations, which follow the sooner, through the
delicacy and tenderness of their skin, from which the
outward skin of the body is in a short time separated and
torn away.

     The remedy of this is twofold; that is to say,
first, to keep the child cleanly, and in the second
place, to take off the sharpness of its urine. As to
keeping it cleanly, she must be a sorry nurse that needs
be taught how to do it, for if she lets it have but dry,
clean, and warm beds and clouts, as often and as soon as
it has fouled and wet them, either by its urine or
excrements, it will be sufficient; and as to the second,
the taking off the sharpness of the child's urine, that
must be done by the nurse's keeping a cooling diet, that
her milk may have the same quality; and therefore she
ought to abstain from all things that may heat it. But,
besides these, cooling and drying remedies are requisite
to be applied to the inflamed parts; therefore let the
parts be bathed with plantain water, with a fourth of
lime water added to it, each time the child's excrements
are wiped off; and if the pain be very great, let it only
be fomented with lukewarm milk. The powder of a pot to
dry it, or a little mill dust strewed upon the parts
affected, may be proper enough; and it is used by several
women. Also Unguentum Album, or Diapampholigos, spread
upon a small piece of Leather, in form of a plaster, will
not be amiss.

     But the chief thing must be the nurse's taking great
care to wrap the inflamed parts with fine rags when she
opens the child, that those parts may not be gathered and
pained by rubbing them together.


     SECT. VII. Of Vomiting in young Children.

     VOMITING in children proceeds sometimes from too
much milk, and sometimes from bad milk, and is often from
a moist loose stomach for as dryness retains, so
looseness lets go. This is for the most part without
danger in children; and they that vomit from their birth
are the lustiest; for the stomach, not being used to
meat, and milk being taken too much, crudities are easily
bred, or the milk is corrupted; and it is better to vomit
these up than to keep them in; but if vomiting last long,
it will cause an atrophy or consumption for want of
nourishment.

     To remedy this, if it be from too much milk, that
which is emitted is yellow and green, or otherwise ill-
coloured and stinking; in this case mend the milk, as has
been showed before; cleanse the child with honey of
roses, and strengthen its stomach with syrup of milk and
quinces made into an electuary. If the humour be hot and
sharp, give the syrup of pomegranates, currants, and
coral; and apply to the belly the plaister of bread, the
stomacb ceret, or bread dipped in hot wine; or take oil
of mastich, quinces, mint, wormwood, each half an ounce;
of nutmegs; by expression, half a dram, chymical oil of
mint, three drops. Coral hath an occult property to
prevent vomiting, and is therefore hung about their
necks.


     SECT. VIII. Of breeding Teeth in young Children.

     This is a very great and yet necessary evil in all
children, having variety of symptoms joined with it; they
begin to come forth, not all at a time, but one after
another, about the sixth and seventh month; the fore
teeth coming first, then the eye teeth, and last of all
the grinders; the eye teeth cause more pain to the child
than any of the rest, because they have a very deep root:
and a small nerve, which makes the eye move. In the
breeding of their teeth, first they feel an itching in
their gums, then they are pierced as with a needle, and
pricked by the sharp bones, whence proceed great pains,
watching and inflammation of the gums, fever, looseness,
and convulsions, especially when they breed their eye-
teeth.

     The signs when children breed their teeth are these:
1. It is known by their time, which is usually about the
seventh month. 2. Their gums are swelled and they feel a
great heat there, with an itching, which makes them put
their fingers in their mouth to rub them, from whence a
moisture distils down into the mouth, because of the pain
they feel there. 3. They hold the nipple faster than
before. 4. the gum is white where the tooth begins to
come; and the nurse in giving them suck finds the mouth
hotter, and that they are much changed, crying every
moment, and cannot sleep, or but very little at a time.
The fever that follows breeding of teeth comes from
choleric humours, inflamed by watching, pain and heat.
And the longer teeth are breeding, the more dangerous it
is, so that many in the breeding of them die of fevers
and convulsions.

     For remedy, two things are to be regarded; one is,
to preserve the child from the evil accidents that may 
happen to it by reason of the great pain; the other, to
assist as much as may be the cutting of the teeth, when
they can hardly out the gums themselves.

     For the first of these, i.e., the preventing these
accidents to the child, the nurse ought to take great
care to keep a good diet, and to use all things that may
cool and temper her milk, that so a fever may not follow
the pain of the teeth. And to prevent the humour from
falling too much upon the inflamed gums, let the child's
belly be kept always loose by gentle clysters, if he be
bound; though oftentimes there is no need of them,
because they are at those times usually troubled with a
looseness, and yet for all that clysters may not be
improper neither.

     As to the other, which is to assist in cutting of
the teeth, that the nurse must do from time to time,
mollifying and loosening them, by rubbing them with her
finger dipped in butter of honey, or let the child have a
virgin's wax candle to chew upon; or anoint the gums with
the mucilage of quince made with mallow water, or with
the brains of a hare, also foment the cheeks with the
decoction of Althaea, and camomile flower and dill, or
with the juice of mallows and fresh butter. If the gums
are inflamed, add juice of nightshade and lettuce. I have
already said, the nurse ought to keep a temperate diet. I
will now add, that barley broth, water gruel, raw eggs,
prunes, lettuce, and endive, are good for her; but let
her avoid salt, sharp, biting, and peppered meats, and
wine.


     SECT. IX. Of the Flux of the Belly, or Looseness in
Infants.

     IT is very common for infants to have the flux of
the belly, or looseness, especially upon the least
indisposition; nor is it to be wondered at, seeing their
natural moistness contributes so much thereto; and if it
be extraordinary violent, such are in a better state of
health than those that are bound. This flux, if violent,
proceeds from divers causes: as, 1. From breeding of
teeth, and is then commonly attended with a fever, in
which the concoction is hindered, and the nourishment
corrupted. 2. From watching. 3. From pain. 4. From
stirring of the humours by a fever. 5. When they suck or
drink too much in a fever. Sometimes they have a flux
without breeding of teeth, from outward cold in the guts
or stomach, that obstructs concoction. If it be from
teeth it is easily known, for the signs in breeding teeth
will discover it. If it be from external cold, there are
signs of other causes. If from a humour flowing from the
head, there are signs of a catarrh, and the excrements
are frothy. If crude and raw humours are voided, there is
wind belching, and phlegmatic excrements. If they be
yellow, green, and stink, the flux is from a hot and
sharp humour. It is beat in breeding teeth when the belly
is loose, as I have said before; but if it be too
violent, and you are afraid it may end in consumption, it
must be stopped; and if the excrements that are voided be
black, attended with a fever, it is very bad.

     The remedy in this case has a principal respect to
the nurse, and the condition of the milk must chiefly be
observed; the nurse must be cautioned that she eat no
green fruit, nor things of hard concoction. If the child
suck not, remove the flux with purges, such as leave a
blooding quality behind them; as syrup of honey of roses,
or a clyster. Take two or three ounces, with an ounce or
two of syrup of roses, and make a clyster. After
cleansing, if it proceed from a hot cause, give syrup of
dried roses, quinces, myrtles, with a little Sanguis
Draconis. Also anoint with oil of roses, myrtles,
mastich, each two drams, with oil of myrtles and wax;
make an ointment. Or take red roses, moulin, each a
handful, cypress roots, two drams; make a bag, boil it in
red wine, and apply it to the belly. Or, use the plaister
of bread, or stomach ointment. If the cause be cold, and
the excrements white, give syrup of mastich, and quinces,
with mint-water. Use outwardly, mint, mastich, cummin; or
take rose seeds, an ounce, cummin, aniseeds, each two
drams; with oil of mastich, wormwood, and wax, make an
ointment.


     SECT. X. Of the Epilepsy, and Convulsions in
Children.

     THIS is a distemper that is the death of many young
children, and proceeds from the brain first, as when the
humours are bred in the brain that cause it, either from
the parents, or from vapours, or bad humours that twitch
the membranes of the brain; it is also sometimes caused
from other distempers, and from bad diet; likewise the
toothache, when the brain consents, causes it, and so
does a sudden fright. As to the distemper itself, it is
manifest, and well enough known where it is; and as to
the cause whence it comes, you may know by the signs of
the disease whether it comes from bad milk, or worms, or
teeth: if these are all absent, it is certain that the
brain is first affected; if it comes with the small pox
or measles, it ceaseth when they come forth, if nature be
strong enough.

     For the remedy of this grievous and often mortal
distemper, give the following powder to prevent it to a
child as soon as it is born: Take male peony roots,
gathered in the decrease of the moon, a scruple, with
leafgold make a powder; or take peony roots a dram, peony
seeds, mistletoe of the oak, elk's hoof, man's skull,
amber each a scruple, musk two grains; make a powder. The
best part of the cure is taking care of the nurse's diet,
which must not be disorderly by any means. If it be from
corrupt milk, provoke a vomit, to do which hold down the
tongue, and put a quill dipped in sweet almonds down the
throat. If it comes from worms, give things as will kill
the worms. If there be a fever, respect that also, and
give coral smaraged and elk's hoof. In the fit, give
epileptic water, as lavender water, and rub with oil of
amber, or hang a peony root, elk's hoof, and smaraged,
about the neck.

     As to a convulsion, it is when the brain labours to
cast out that which troubles it; the matter is in the
marrow of the back, and fountain of the nerves; it is a
stubborn disease, and often kills. For remedy whereof, in
the fit, wash the body, especially the back bone, with
decoction of Althaea, lily-roots, peony and camomile
flowers, and anoint it with man's and goose grease, oils
of worms, orris, lillies, foxes, turpentine, mastich,
storax, and calamint. The sunflower is also very good,
boiled in water, to wash the child.


PART II.

CONTAINING PROPER AND SAFE REMEDIES FOR THE CURING OF ALL
THOSE DISTEMPERS THAT ARE PECULIAR TO THE FEMALE SEX, AND
ESPECIALLY THOSE THAT HAVE OBSTRUCTION TO THE BEARING OF
CHILDREN.


HAVING finished the first part of this book, and therein
I hope amply made good my promise to the reader, I am now
come to treat of the distempers peculiar to the female
sex, in which it is not my design to enlarge; as to treat
of all the distempers they are incident to, but those
only to which they are most subject when in a breeding
condition, and those that keep them from being so; for
each of which distempers I have laid down such proper and
safe remedies, as with the divine blessing may be
sufficient to repel them and since, as amongst all the
diseases to which human nature is subject, there is none
that more diametrically opposes the very end of our
creation, and the design of nature in the formation of
different sexes, and the power thereby given us for the
work of generation, than that of sterility or barrenness,
which, where it prevails, renders the must accomplished
midwife but a useless person and destroys the design of
our book; I think, therefore, barrenness is an effect
that deserves our first consideration.


CHAPTER I.

OF BARRENNESS; ITS SEVERAL KINDS, WITH PROPER REMEDIES
AGAINST IT; AND THE SIGNS OF INSUFFICIENCY BOTH IN MEN
AND WOMEN.


     SECT. I. OF Barrenness in general.

     As there is no general rule but will admit of some
exception against this second part; for though I have
promised to treat herein only of diseases peculiar to the
female sex, yet this chapter will engage me to speak of a
defect in men, barrenness being an effect incident to
them also; and therefore it is so necessary to be handled
with respect to men as well as women, that without
treating of it so, I shall not be able to make good the
old proverb of setting the saddle on the right horse.

     Having premised this, and thereby anticipated an
objection, shall now proceed to the subject of this
chapter, which is barrenness.

     Barrenness is either natural or accidental.

     Natural barrenness is when a woman is barren, though
the instruments of generation are perfect both in herself
and husband, and no preposterous or diabolical course
used to cause it, and neither age nor disease, nor any
natural defect hindering, and yet the woman remains
naturally barren, and conceives not.

     Now this may proceed from a natural cause; for if
the man and woman be of one complexion, they seldom have
children; and the reason is clear, for the universal
course of nature being formed by the Almighty of a
composition of contraries, cannot be increased by a
composition of likes; and therefore, if the constitution
of the woman be hot and dry as well as of the man, there
can be no conception and if, on the contrary, the man
should be of a cold and moist constitution as well as the
woman, the effect would be the same; and this barrenness
is purely natural. The only way to help it is for people
before they marry to observe each other's constitution
and complexion, if they design to have children. If their
complexions and constitutions be alike they are not fit
to come together, for the discordant nature makes the
only harmony in the work of generation.

     Another natural cause of barrenness is want of love
between the man and wife. Love is that vital principle
that ought to inspire each organ in the act of
generation, or else it will be spiritless and dull; for
if their hearts be not united in love, bow should their
seed unite to cause conception? and this is sufficiently
evinced in that there never follows conception on a rape;
therefore, if men and women design to have children, let
them live so that their hearts as well as their bodies
may be united, or else they may miss of their
expectations.

     A third cause of natural barrenness is the letting
of virgin's blood in the arm before their natural courses
are come down, which is usually in the fourteenth or
fifteenth years of their age; sometimes perhaps before
the thirteenth, but never before the twelfth. And because
usually they are out of order, and indisposed before
their purgations come down, their parents run to the
doctor to know what is the matter; and he then prescribes
opening a vein in the arm, seeing that it was fulness of
blood which was the cause Of offending, and this makes
her well at present; and when the young virgin happens to
be in the same disorder again, the mother straight runs
to the surgeon, and he directly uses the same remedy; and
by these means the blood is diverted from its proper
channel, that it comes not down the womb as in another
woman; and so the womb dries up, and the woman is for
ever barren. The way to prevent this is to let no virgin
blood in the arm before her courses come down well; but
if there be occasion, let her blood in the foot; for that
will bring the blood downwards, and by that moans provoke
the menstrues to come down.
Another cause of natural barrenness is the debility in
copulation; if persons perform not that act with all the
heat and ardour that nature requires, they may as well
let it alone, and expect to have children without it; for
frigidity and coldness never produces conception. Of the
cure of this we will speak by and bye, after I have
spoken of accidental barrenness, which is what is
occasioned by some morbific matter or infirmity upon the
body, either of the man or the woman, which, being
removed, they become fruitful, And since (as I have
before noted) the first and great law of creation was to
increase and multiply, and barrenness is the direct
opposition to the law, and frustrates the end of our
creation; and that is a great affliction to divers to be
without children, and often causes man and wife to have
hard thoughts one of another, each  party thinking the
cause not in them. I shall here, for the satisfaction of
well-meaning people, set down the signs and causes of
insufficiency both in men and women; premising then
first, that when people have no children, they must not
presently blame either party, for neither may be in
fault, but perhaps God sees it not good (for reasons best
known unto Himself) to give them any; of which we have
divers instances in history. And though the Almighty in
the production of nature works by natural means, yet
where He withholds His blessing natural means are
ineffectual; for it is the blessing which is the power
and energy by which nature brings her productions forth.

     SECT. II. Signs and Causes of Insufficiency in Men.

     ONE cause may be in some viciousness in the yard, as
if the same be crooked, or any ligaments thereof
distorted and broken, whereby the ways and passages
through which the seed should flow, come to be stopped or
vitiated.

     Another cause may be too much weakness of the yard,
and tenderness thereof, so that it is not strongly enough
erected to inject seed into the womb; for the strength
and stiffness of the yard very much conduces to
conception, by reason of the forcible conjection of the
seed.

     Also if the stones have received any hurt, so that
they cannot exercise the proper gift in producing seed,
or if they be oppressed with any inflammation or humour,
wound, or ulcer, or drawn up within the belly, and not
appearing outwardly, these are signs of insufficiency and
causes of barrenness.

     Also a man may be barren by reason of the defect of
seed: as first if he cast forth no seed at all, or less
in substance than is needful. Or secondly, if the seed be
vicious, or unfit for generations, as on the one side, it
happens in bodies that are gross and fat, the matter of
it being defective, and on the other side too much
leanness, or continual wasting or consumption of body,
destroys seed; nature turning all the matter and
substance thereof into nutriment of the body.

     Too frequent copulation is also one great cause of
barrenness in men; for it attracteth the seminal moisture
from the stones before it is sufficiently prepared and
concocted; so if any one by daily copulation do exhaust
and draw out all the moisture of the seed, then do the
stones draw the moist humours from the superior veins
into themselves; and so having but a little blood in
them, hey are forced of necessity to cast it out raw and
unconcocted, and thus the stones are violently deprived
of the moisture of their veins, and the superior veins
from all the other parts of the body,  or their proper
nourishment, thereby depriving the body of its vital
spirits; and therefore no wonder that those that use
immoderate copulation are very weak in their bodies;
seeing their whole body is thereby deprived of their best
and purest blood, and of the spirit, insomuch that many
who have been too much addicted to that pleasure have
killed themselves in the very act; and therefore it is no
wonder if such unconcocted and undigested seed be unfit
for generation.

     Gluttony, drunkenness, and other excesses, do so
much hinder men from fruitfulness, that it makes them
unfit for generation.

     But among other causes of barrenness in men, this
also is one that makes them barren, and almost of the
nature of eunuchs, and that is the incision, or the
cutting of their veins behind the ears, which in case of
distempers is oftentimes done; for according to the
opinion of most physicians and anatomists, the seed flows
from the brain by those veins behind the ears more than
from any other part of the body. From whence it is very
probable that the transmission of the seed is hindered by
the cutting of the veins behind the ears, so that it
cannot descend at all to the testicles, or come thither
very crude and raw. And thus much for the signs and
causes of barrenness in men.

     SECT. III. Signs and Causes of Insufficiency or
Barrenness in Women.

     ALTHOUGH there are many causes of the barrenness of
women, yet the chief and principal are internal,
respecting either the privy parts, the womb, or
menstruous blood.

     Therefore Hippocrates saith (speaking of the either
easy or difficult conception of women) the first
consideration is to be had of their species, for little
women are more apt to conceive than great; slender than
gross; white and fair, than ruddy and high-coloured;
black than wan; those that have their veins conspicuous
are more apt to conceive than others; but to the very
flesh is evil: to have great swelled breasts is good.

     The next thing to be considered is the monthly
purgations, whether they have been duly every month and
whether they flow plentifully, and are of a good colour,
and whether they have been equal every month.

     Then the womb or place of conception is to be
considered. It ought to be clean and sound, dry and soft;
not retracted nor drawn up; not prone, nor descending
downwards, nor the mouth thereof turned away, nor too
close shut. But to speak more particularly:

     The first parts to be spoken of are the pudenda, or
privities, and the womb; which parts are shut and
inclosed either by nature or against nature; and from
hence such in women are called Imperfores; as in some
women the mouth of their womb continues compressed, or
closed up from the time of their birth, until the coming
down of their courses, and then on a sudden when their
terms press forward to purgation, they are molested with
great and unusual pains; some of these break of their own
accord, others are dissected and opened by physicians,
others never break at all, and it brings death.

     All these Atius particularly handles, showing that
the womb is shut three manner of ways, which hinders
conception. And the first is, when the lips of the
pudenda grow or cleave together; the second is, when 
there are certain membranes growing in the middle part of
the matrix within; the third is, when (though the lips
and bosom of the pudenda may appear fair and open) the
mouth of the womb may be quite shut up; all which are
occasions of barrenness, in that they hinder both the use
of man, the monthly courses, and conception.

     But amongst all the causes of barrenness in women
the greatest is in the womb, which is the field of
generation; and if this field be corrupt, it is in vain
to expect any fruit, let it be ever so well sown, for it
may be unfit for generation, by reason of many distempers
to which it is subject; as, for instance, over much heat,
and over much cold; for women, whose wombs are too thick
and cold, cannot conceive, because coldness extinguishes
the heat of the human seed. Immoderate moisture of the
womb also destroys the seed of man, and makes it
ineffectual, as corn sown in ponds and marshes; and so
does over much dryness in the womb, so that the seed
perisheth for want of nutriment. Immoderate heat of the
womb is also a cause of barrenness, for it scorcheth up
the seed, as corn sown in the drought of summer; for
immoderate heat hurts all the parts of the body, for no
conception can live in the woman.

     And when unnatural humours are engendered, as too
much phlegm, tympanies, wind, water, worms, or any such
evil humours abounding contrary to nature, it causeth
barrenness; as does all the terms not coming down in due
order, as I have already said.

     A woman may also have other accidental causes of
barrenness (at least such as may hinder her conception),
as sudden frights, anger, grief, and perturbation of the
mind, too violent exercises, as leaping, dancing, running
after copulation, and the like. But I will now add some
signs by which these things may be known.

     If the barrenness be in the man through overmuch
heat in his seed, the woman may easily feel in receiving
it.

      If the nature of the woman be too hot, and so unfit
for conception, it will appear by having her terms very
little, and the colour inclining to yellowness, she is
also very hasty, choleric, and crafty, her pulse beats
very swift, and she is very desirous of copulation.

     To know whether the fault is in the man or the
woman, sprinkle the man's urine upon a lettuce leaf and
the woman's upon another, and that which dries away first
is unfruitful. Also take five wheaten corns, and seven
beans, put them into an earthen  pot, and let the party
make water therein. Let this stand seven days, and if in
that time they begin to sprout, then the party is
fruitful; but if they sprout not, then the party is
barren, whether it be man or woman. This is a certain
sign.

     There are some that make this experiment of a
woman's fruitfulness: Take myrrh, red storax and some
odoriferous things, and make a perfume of it, which let
the woman receive into the neck of the womb through a
funnel: if the woman feels the smoke ascend through her
body to the nose, then she is fruitful, otherwise barren.
Some also take garlic and beer, and let the woman lie on
her back upon it, and if she feel the scent thereof to
her nose it is a sign of fruitfulness.

     Culpepper and others also give a great deal of
credit to the following experiment:

     Take a handful of barley, and steep half of it in
the urine of the man, and the other half in the urine of
the woman, for the space of four and twenty hours, and
then take it out, and set the man's by itself, and the 
woman's by itself; set it in a flower pot, or some other
thing where you may let it dry; then water the man's
every morning with his own urine, and the woman's with
hers; and that which grows first is the most fruitful,
and if one grow not at all that party is naturally
barren.

     But having now spoken enough of the disease, it is
high time to assign the cure.

     If barrenness proceeds from stoppage of the
menstrues, let the woman sweat, for that opens the parts;
and the best way to sweat is in a hot house. Then let the
woman be strengthened by drinking a draught of white
wine, wherein a handful of stinking arrack, first
bruised, has been boiled; for by a secret magnetic virtue
it strengthens the womb and by a sympathetic quality
removes any disease thereof. To which add also a handful
of vervain, which is very good to strengthen both the
womb and head, which are commonly afflicted together by
sympathy. Having used these two or three days, if they
come not down, take of calamint, pennyroyal, thyme,
betony, dittany, burnet, feverfew, mugwort, sage, peony
roots, juniper berries, half a handful of each, or so
many as can he got; let all these be boiled in beer, and
taken for her ordinary drink.

     Take one part of the gentian root, two parts of
centaury, distil them with ale in an alembic, alter you
have bruised the gentian roots, and infused them well.
This water is an admirable remedy to provoko the terms.
But if you have not this water in readiness, take a dram
of centaury, and half a dram of gentian roots bruised,
boiled in posset drink, and drink a draught of it at
night going to bed. Seed of wild navew beaten to powder,
and a drain of it taken in the morning in white wine,
also is very good; but if it answers not, she must be let
blood in the legs. And be sure you administer your
medicines a little before the full of the moon, or
between the new and full moon, by no means in the wane of
the moon; if you do, you will find them ineffectual.

     If barrenness proceed from the overflowing of the
menstrues, then strengthen the womb as you were taught
before; afterwards anoint the reins of the back with alt
of roses, oil of myrtle, oil of quinces, every night, and
then wrap a piece of white bays about your reins, the
cotton side next the skin, and keep the same always to
it. But above all, I recommend this medicine to you. Take
comfrey leaves or roots, and clown wound wort, of each a
handful, bruise them well and boil them in ale, and drink
a good draught of it now and then, or take cinnamon,
cassia lignea, opium, of each two drams, myrrh, white
pepper, galbanum, of each one dram, dissolve the gum and
opium in white wine; beat the rest into powder; then make
into pills, by mixing of them together exactly, and let
the patient take two pills every night going to bed; but
let the pill not exceed fifteen grains.

     If barrenness proceed from a flux of the womb, the
cure must be according to the cause producing it, or
which the flux proceeds from, which may be known by its
signs: for a flux of the womb being a continual
distillation from it for a long time together, the colour
of what it voided shows what humour it is that offends;
in some it is red, and that proceeds from blood
putrefied; in some it is yellow, and that denotes choler;
in others white and pale, and that denotes phlegm. If
pure blood comes out, as if a vein were opened, some
corrosion or gnawing of the womb is to be feared. All
them are known by these signs.

     The place of the conception is continually moist
with the humours, the fate is ill-coloured, the party
loathes meat, and breathes with difficulty, the eyes are
much swollen, which is sometimes without pain. If the
offending humour be pure blood, then you must let blood
in the arm, as the cephalic vein is fittest to draw back
the blood, and then let the juice of plantain and comfrey
be injected into the womb. If phlegm be the cause let
cinnamon be a spice used in all her meats and drinks; and
let her take a little Venice treacle or mithridate every
morning. Let her boil burnet, mugwort, feverfew, and
vervain, in all her broths. Also half a dram of myrrh
taken every morning, is an excellent remedy against this
malady. If choler be the cause, let her take burrage,
bugloss, red roses, endive, and succory roots, lettuce
and white poppy seed, of each a handful; boil these  in
white wine till one half be wasted; let her drink half a
pint every morning; to which half a pint add syrup of
peach-flowers and syrup of cichony, of each an ounce,
with a little rhubarb, and this will gently purge her. if
it proceeds from putrefied blood, let her be blooded in
the foot, and then strengthen the womb, as I have
directed in stopping of the menstrues.

     If barrenness be occasioned by the falling out of
the womb, as  sometimes happens, let her apply sweet
scents to her nose, such as civet, galbanum, storax,
calamitis, wood of aloes, and such other things as are of
that nature; and let her lay stinking things to the womb,
such as asafoetida, oil of amber, or the smoke of her own
hair being burnt; for this is a certain truth, that the
womb flies from all stinking, and to all sweet things.
But the most infallible cure in this case is this: take a
common burdock leaf (which you may keep dry if your
please, all the year), apply this to her head, and it
will draw the womb upward. In fits of the mother apply it
to the sole of her feet, and it will draw the womb
downwards. Bur seed, beaten into a powder, draws the womb
which way you please according as it is applied.

     If barrenness proceeds from a hot cause, let the
party take  whey, and clarify it, and drink it for her
ordinary drink. Let her also inject the juice of plantain
into the womb with a syringe; if it be in winter, when
you can get the juice, make a strong decoction of the
leaves and roots in water, and inject that up with a
syringe; but let it be but blood-warm, and you will find
this medicine of great efficacy. And further, to take
away barrenness proceeding from hot causes, take often
conserve of roses, cold lozenges made of tragacanth, the
confections of tralsantali, and use to smell the
camphire, rose water, and saunders. It is also good to
bleed the basilica or liver vein, and take four or five
ounces of blood, and then take this purge; take
electuarum de eipithymo de succo rosarum, of each two
drams and a half, clarified whey four ounces; mix them
well together, and take it in the morning fasting; sleep
after it about an hour and a half, and fast four hours
after it, and about an hour before you eat anything drink
a good draught of whey. Also take lily water, four
ounces; mandragora water, one ounce; saffron, half a
scruple; beat the saffron to powder, and mix it with the
waters, and drink them warm in the morning; use this
eight days together.

Some excellent Remedies against Barrenness and to cause 
Fruitfulness.

     TAKE broom flowers, smallage, parsley seed, cummin,
mugwort, feverfew, of each half a scruple; aloes half an
ounce; India salt, saffron, of each half a dram; beat and
mix them well together, and put it to five ounces of
feverfew-water warm, stop it up close and let it stand
and dry in a warm place, and thus do two or three times
one after another, then make each dram into six  pills,
and take one of them every day before supper.

     For a purging medicine against barrenness: take
conserve of benedicta lax, one quarter of an ounce;
depsillo, three drams; electuary de succo rosarum, one
dram; mix them together with feverfew water, and drink it
in the morning betimes. About three days after the
patient hath taken the purge, let her be let blood four
or five ounces in the median or common black vein in the 
right foot; and then take five days, one after another,
filed ivory, a dram and a half in feverfew water; and
during the time let her sit in the following bath an hour
together morning and night: Take wild yellow rapes,
daucus, balsam wood and fruit, ash-keys, of each two
handfuls, red and white behen, broom flowers, of each a
handful; musk three grains; amber, saffron, of each a
scruple; boil all in water sufficiently; but the musk,
saffron, amber, and broom flowers, put them into the
decoction after it is boiled and strained.

     A confection very good against barrenness: Take
pistachia, pingles, eringoes, of each half an ounce;
saffron one dram; lignum aloes, gallingade, mace,
coriophilla, balm flowers, red and white behen, of each
four scruples; shaven ivory, cassia bark, of each two
scruples; white sugar six ounces; decoct all these well
together in twelve ounces of balm water, and stir it well
together; then put to it musk and amber, of each a
scruple; take thereof the quantity of a nutmeg three
times a day, in the morning, an hour before noon, and an
hour after supper.

     But if the cause of barrenness either in man or
woman be through scarcity or diminution of the natural 
seed, then such things are to be taken as do increase the
seed, and incite or stir up to venery, and further
conception, which I shall here set down, and then
conclude this chapter of barrenness.

     For this, yellow rape seed baked in bread is very 
good; also young fat flesh not too much salted; also
saffron, the tails stincus, and long pepper prepared in
wine. But such sour, sharp, doughy, and slimy meats, long
sleep after meat with surfeiting and drunkenness, and as
much as they keep themselves from sorrowing.

     These things following increase the natural seed,
and stir up venery, and recover the seed again, when it
is lost, viz., eggs, milk, rice boiled in milk, sparrows
brains, flesh, bones and all; the stones and pizzles of
bulls, bucks, rams, and bears; also cock stones, lamb
stones, partridges, quails, and pheasant eggs; and this
is an undeniable aphorism, that whatever any creature is
addicted unto they move or incite the woman or man that
eats them to the like; and therefore partridges, quails,
sparrows, etc., being extremely addicted to venery, they
work the same effect in those men and women that eat
them. Also take notice, that in what part of the body the
faculty which you would strengthen lies, take the same
part of the body of another creature, in whom the faculty
is strong, as a medicine. As, for instance, the
procreative faculty lies in the testicles, therefore cock
stones, lamb stones etc., are proper to stir up venery. I
will also give you another general rule: all creatures
that are fruitful, being eaten, make them fruitful that
eat them; as crabs, lobsters, prawns, pigeons, etc. The
stones of a fox dried and beaten to powder, and a dram
taken in the morning in sheep's milk, and the stones of a
boar taken in the like manner, are very good. The heart
of a male quail carried about the man, and the heart of a
female quail carried about the woman, causeth natural
love and fruitfulness. Let them also that would increase
their seed eat and drink of the best as much as they can,
for, fino cerere et libero friget Venus, is an old
proverb; which is, without good meat and good drink Venus
will be frozen to death.

     Pottages are good to increase the seed, such as are
made of beans, pease, and lupines, and mix the rest with
sugar. French beans, wheat sodden in broth, aniseed, also
onions stewed, garlic, leeks, yellow rapes, fresh bugwort
roots, eryngo roots confected, ginger confected, etc. Of
fruits, hazel nuts, cypress nuts, pistachia, almonds, and
Marchpanes made thereof. Spices good to increase seed,
are cinnamon, cardamom, galangal, long pepper, cloves,
ginger, saffron; asafoetida, taken a dram and a half in
good wine, is very good for this purpose.

     The weakness and debility of a man's yard being a
great hindrance to procreation, let him to strengthen it
use the following ointments: take wax, oil of bevercod,
marjoram gentle, and oil of coflus, of each a like
quantity, mix it into an ointment, and put to it a little
musk, and with It anoint the yard, cods, etc. Take of
house emmets three drams, oil of white sefannum, oil of
lilies, of each an ounce; pound and bruise the ants, and
put them to the oil, and let them stand in the sun six
days, then strain out the oil, and add to it euphorbium
one scruple, pepper and rue, of each one dram, mustard
seed half a dram. Set this again altogether in the sun
two or three days, then anoint the instruments of
generation therewith. But so much for this chapter.


CHAPTER II.

THE DISEASES OF THE WOMB.


     I HAVE already said, that the womb is the field of
generation; and if this field be corrupted it is in vain
to expect any fruit though it be ever so well sown; it
is, therefore, not without reason, that I intend in this
chapter to set down the several distempers to which the
womb is obnoxious, and proper and safe remedies against
them.


     SECT. I. Of the Hot Distempers of the Womb.

     THIS distemper consists in the excess of heat; for
the heat of the womb is necessary for conception but if
it be too much, it nourisheth not the seed, but
disperseth its head, and hinders the conception: this
preternatural heat is sometimes from the birth, and makes
them barren; but if it be accidental, it is from hot
causes that bring the heat and the blood to the womb: it
arises also from internal and external medicines, and
from too much hot meat, drink, and exercise. Those that
are troubled with this distemper have but few courses;
and those yellow, black, burnt, or sharp, have hair
betimes on their privities; they are very prone to lust,
and are subject to the headache, and abound with choler.
And when the distemper is strong upon them, they have but
few terms, and out of order, being bad and hard to flow,
and in time they become hypochondriacs, and for the most
part barren, having sometimes a frenzy of the womb.

     The remedy is to use coolers, so that they offend
not the vessels that must be open for the flux of the
terms. Therefore inwardly use coolers, such as succory,
endive, violets, water-lilies, sorrel, lettuce, saunders,
and syrups, and conserves made thereof. Also take
conserve of succory, violets, water-lilies, burrage, each
an ounce; conserve of roses half an ounce, diamargation
friged diatriascantal each half a dram; and with syrup of
violets, or juice of citrons, make an electuary. For
outward applications make use of ointment of roses,
violets, water-lilies, gourds, Venus-narvel, applied to
the back and loins.

     Let the air be cool, her garments thin, and her meat
endive, lettuce, succory, and barley. Give her no hot
meats, nor strong wine, unless mixed with water. Rest is
good for her, but she must abstain from copulation,
though she may sleep as long as she will.

     SECT. III. Of the cold Distempers of the Womb.

     THIS distemper is the reverse of the foregoing, and
equally an enemy to generation, being caused by a cold
quality abounding to excess, and proceeds from a too cold 
air, rest, idleness, and cooling medicines. It may be
known by an aversion to venery. and taking no pleasure in
the act of copulation when they spend their seed. Their
terms are phlegmatic, thick, and slimy, and do not flow
as they should. The womb is windy, and the seed crude and
waterish, it is the cause of obstructions and barrenness,
and hard to be cured.

     For the cure of this distemper use this water: take
galangal, cinnamon, nutmeg, mace, cloves, each two drams;
ginger, cubebs, zedoary, cardamom, each an ounce; grains
of paradise, long pepper, each half an ounce; beat them,
and put them into six quarts of wine for eight days; then
add sage, mint, balm, motherwort, each three handfuls.
Let them stand eight days more, then pour off the wine,
and beat the herbs and the spices, and then pour on the
wine again, and distil them. Or you may use this: take
cinnamon, nutmegs, doves, mace, ginger, cubebs,
cardamoms, grains of Paradise, each an ounce and a half;
galangal six drams, long pepper half an ounce, zedoary
five drams; bruise them and add six quarts of wine; put
them into a cellar nine days, daily stirring them; then
add of mint two handfuls, and let them stand fourteen
days, pour off the wine and bruise them, and then pour on
the wine again, and distil them. Also anoint with oil of
lilies, rue, angelica, bays, cinnamon, cloves, mace, and
nutmeg. Let her diet and air be warm, her meat of easier
concoction, seasoned with aniseed, fennel, and thyme, and
let her avoid raw fruits and milk diets.

     SECT. IV. Of the Inflation of The Womb.

     THE inflation of the womb is a stretching of it by
wind, called by some a windy mole; the wind proceeding
from a cold matter, whether thick or thin, contained in
the veins of the womb, by which the weak heat thereof is
overcome and it either flows thither from other parts, or
is gathered there by cold meats or drinks; cold air may
be a procuring cause of it also, as women that lie in are
exposed to it. The wind is contained either in the cavity
of the vessels of the womb, or between the tunicles, and
it may be known by a swelling in the region of the womb,
which sometimes reaches to the navel, loins, and
diaphragma; and it rises or abates as the wind increases
or decreases. It differs from the dropsy, in that it
never swells so high; and that neither the physician nor
midwife may take it for a conception, let them observe
the signs of a woman with child laid down in the first
part of this book; and if one sign be wanting, they may
suspect it to be an inflation, of which this is a farther
sign, that in conception the swelling still increaseth,
and sometimes decreaseth; also if you strike upon the
belly, in an inflation, there will be a noise, but not so
in case there is a conception. It also differs from a
mole, because in that there is a weight and hardness in
the belly; and when they move from one side to another,
they feel a weight which moveth; but not so in this. If
the inflation be without the cavity of the womb, the pain
is greater and the more extensive, nor is there any
noise, because the wind is more pent up.

     This distemper is neither of a long continuation,
nor dangerous, if looked after in time; and if it be in 
the cavity of the womb, is more easily expelled. To which
purpose give her diaphnicon, with a little castor, and
sharp clysters that expel wind. If this distemper happen
to a women in travail, let her not purge after delivery,
nor bleed, because it is from a cold matter; but if it
come after child-bearing, and her terms come down
sufficiently, and that she has fulness of blood, let the
Saphena vein be opened; after which let her take the
following electuary: take conserve of betony and
rosemary, of each an ounce and a half; candied eringoes,
citron peels candied, each half an ounce; Diacimium,
diagalengal, each a dram; oil of aniseed six drops, and
with syrup of citrons make an electuary. For outward
applications make a cataplasm of rue, mugwort, camomile,
dill, calamints, new pennyroyal; thyme, with oil of rue,
keir, and camomile; and let the following clyster, to
expel wind, be put into the womb: Take agnus castus, rye,
calamint, each a handful; aniseed, castus, cinnamon, each
two drams, boil them in wine to half a pint. She may
likewise use sulphur, baths, and spa waters, both inward
and outward, because they expel wind.

     SECT. V. Of a Dropsy in the Womb.

      THIS is another morbific effect of the womb,
proceeding from water, as that before mentioned did from
wind; by which the belly is so swelled, that it deceives
many, causing them to think themselves with child, when
indeed they are not; being no other than unnatural
swelling raised by the gathering together of waters, from
moisture, mixed with the terms, and with an evil
sanguification from the liver and spleen; also by
immoderate drinking, or the eating of crude meats, all
which causing a repletion, do suffocate the native heat;
it may also be caused by the overflowing of the courses,
or by any other immoderate evacuation. The signs of this
distemper are: the lower parts of the belly, with the
privities, are puffed up and pained; the feet swell, the
natural colour of the face decays; the appetite is
departed, the terms also are fewer, and cease before
their time; her breasts are also soft, but without milk.
This is distinguished from a general dropsy, in that the
lower parts of the belly are most swelled; neither does
the sanguificative faculty appear so hurtful, nor the
urine so pale, nor the countenance so soon changed,
neither are the superior parts so extenuated, as in a
general dropsy. But yet this distemper foretells the
total ruin of the natural functions, by that singular
consent the womb hath with the liver, and therefore an
evil habit of body or a general dropsy will follow.

     For the cure of this disease, first mitigate the
pain with fomentations, of mellilot mallows, linseed,
camomile, and althea, then let the humour be prepared
with syrup of stoechus, calamint, mugwort of both sorts,
with the distilled waters or decoctions of elder,
marjoram, sage, origin, speerage, pennyroyal, and
bettony; and let her purge with senna, agaric, rhubarb,
and eliterian. To purge the water; take calamints,
mugwort, lovage roots, pennyroyal, each a handful; savil,
a pugil; madder roots, angelica, of each half an ounce;
boil them in water, and sweeten them with sugar. Or, if
she likes it better, make broths of the same. Also take
specirem diambree, diamesci, dulcis, diacalamenti,
diacinnamoni, diacimini, troce de myrrh, of each two
drams; sugar one pound, with bettony water make lozenges,
and let her take of them two hours before meals. Apply
also to the bottom of the belly, as hot as can be
endured, a little bag of camomile, cummin, and mellilot
boiled in oil of rue; and anoint the belly and privities
with unguentum Agrippae, mingling therewith oil of Iroes.
Let the lower parts of the belly be covered with a
plaister of bay berries, or with a cataplasm made of
cummin, camomile and briony roots, adding thereto cows'
and goats' dung. For injection into the womb: Take asarum
roots three drams, pennyroyal, calamint, each half a
handful, savin, a pugil, mechoacan a dram; aniseed,
cummin, each half a dram. Boil them, and take six ounces
strained, with oil of elder and orris, each an ounce; and
inject it into the womb by a metrenchita; let the air be
hot and dry; moderate exercise may be allowed, but much
sleep is forbidden. She may eat the flesh of partridges,
larks, chickens, mountain birds, hares, coneys, etc.; and
let her drink be wine, mixed with a little water.

     SECT. VI.
     Of an Inflammation of the Womb.

     THIS effect is a tumour possessing the womb,
accompanied with unnatural heat, by obstruction, and
gathering together of corrupt blood; for the blood that
comes to the womb gets out of the vessels into its
substance, and grows hot, putrefies, and causeth
inflammation, either all over, or in part, before or
behind, above or below. This happens also by suppression
of the menstrues, repletion of the whole body, immoderate
copulation, often handling of the genitals, difficult
child-birth, vehement agitation of the body, or by falls
or blows. The signs of this inflammation are tumours,
with heat and pain in the region of the womb, stretching
and heaviness in the privities, also a pain in the head
and stomach, with vomiting, coldness of the knees,
convulsions of the neck, dotting, trembling of the heart,
and sometimes straitness of the breath, by reason of heat
which is communicated to the diaphragma, or midriff; and
the breasts, sympathising with the womb, are pained and
swelled; but more particularly if the forepart of the
matrix be inflamed, the privities are grieved, and the
urine is suppressed, or flows forth with difficulty; if
it be behind, the loins and back suffer, and the belly is
bound; if the inflammation be in the bottom of the womb,
the pain is towards the navel; if the neck of the womb be
affected, the midwife, putting up her finger, may feel
the mouth of it retracted and closed up, with a hardness
about it. As to the prognostics of it, all inflammations
of the womb are dangerous, and sometimes deadly;
especially if it be all over the womb; if the woman be
with Child she rarely escapes; an abortion follows, and
the mother dies.

     As to the cure: First, let the humours flowing to
the womb be repelled; for the effecting of which, after
the belly hath been opened by cooling clysters, letting
of blood will be needful; open therefore a vein in the
arm, but have a care of bleeding in the foot, lest
thereby you draw more blood to the womb; but afterwards
to derive; if it be from the terms, stop it you may. The
opinion of the Galen is, that the blood may be diverted
by bleeding in the arm, or cupping the breasts; and that
may be by opening an ankle vein, and cupping upon the
hips. Then purge gently with cassia, rhubarb, senna, and
mirobolana, thus: Take senna two drams, aniseed one
scruple, mirobolana half an ounce, barley water a
sufficient quantity, make a decoction; dissolve it in
syrup of succory, with rhubarb two ounces, pulp of cassia
half an ounce, oil of aniseed two drops, and make a
potion. Also at the beginning of the disease anoint the
privities and reins with oil of roses and quinces. Make
plaisters of plantain, linseed, barley-meal, mellilot,
fenugreek, and white of eggs; and if the pain be
vehement, add a little opium. For repellers and anodynes
take Venus-narvel, purslain, lettuce, house-leek, vine-
leaves, each a handful, boil them in wine, and barley-
meal, two ounces; pomegranate flowers two drams, boil a
dram with oil of roses, and make a poultice. Or take
diacibilon simple, two ounces, juice of Venus-narvel, and
plantain, each half an ounce, take of fenugreek, mallow
roots, decocted figs, linseed. barley-meal, dove's dung,
turpentine, of each three drams; deer's suet, half a
dram, opium half a scruple, and with wax make a plaister.
After it is ripe, break it by motion of the body,
coughing, sneezing, or else by cupping and pessaries: as,
Take rue half a handful, figs an ounce, pigeon's dung,
orris roots, each half a dram; with wool make a pessary.
After it is broken, and the pains abate, then cleanse and
heal the ulcer with such cleansers as these: viz., whey,
barley water, honey, wormwood, smallage, gribus, orris,
birthwort, myrrh, turpentine, alum: as take new milk
boiled a pint, honey, half a pint, orris powder half an
ounce, and use it very often every day. If it break about
the bladder use an emulsion of cold seeds, whey, and
syrup of violets. Let her drink barley water or clarified
whey, and her meat be chickens, and chicken broth, boiled
with endive, succory, bugloss, and mallows.

     SECT. VII. Of Schirrosity And Hardness of the Womb.

      PHLEGM or swelling in the womb neglected, or not
perfectly cured, often produces a schirrosity in the
matrix, which is a hard insensible, unnatural swelling,
causing barrenness, and begetting an indisposition of the
whole body. The immediate cause is a thick, earthy humour
(as natural melancholy for instance), gathered in the 
womb, and causing a schirrous without inflammation. It is
a proper schirrous when there is neither sense nor pain,
and it is an improper schirrous when there is some little
sense and pain. This distemper is most usual in women of
a melancholy constitution, and such also as have not been
cleansed from their menstrues, or from the retention of
the lochia or after purgings; it is likewise sometimes
caused by eating corrupt meat; for those inordinate
longings called Pica; to which breeding women are often
subject: and lastly, it may also proceed from
obstructions and ulcers in the womb, or some evil effects
in the liver and spleen. It may be known by these signs.
If the effect be in the bottom of the womb, she feels as
it were a heavy burden representing a mole, yet
differing, in that the breasts are attenuated, and the
whole body also. If the neck of the womb be hardened no
outward humour will appear, the mouth of it is retracted,
and touched with the finger feels hard; nor can she have
the company of a man without great pains and pricklings.
This schirrosity or hardness is (when confirmed)
incurable, and will turn into a cancer, or dropsy; and
ending in a cancer, proves deadly; the reason of which
is, because the native heat in those parts being almost
smothered, it is hardly to be restored again.

     For the cure of this, first prepare the humour with
syrup of burrage, succory, epilcymum and clarified whey;
which being done, take of these pills following;
according to the strength of the patient: Take hicra
pikra six drams and a half; agaric, lazuli abluti falis
Indiae, coloquintida, of each one dram and a half; mix
them and make pills. The body being purged proceed to
mollify the hardness as followeth: anoint the privities
and the neck of the womb with the following ointment:
Take oil of capers, lilies, sweet almonds, jessamin, each
an ounce; fresh  butter, hen's grease, goose grease, of
each an ounce; mucilage, fenugreek, althea, ointments of
althea, each six drams; ammoniacum dissolved in wine, an
ounce, which with wax make an ointment. Then apply below
the navel diachylon fernelli; and make emulsions of figs,
mugwort, mallows, penny-royal, althea, fennel roots,
mellilot, fenugreek, and linseed boiled in water; but for
injection, take bedellium dissolved in wine, oil of sweet
almonds, lilies, camomile, each two ounces, marrow of
veal bone and hen's grease each an ounce, with the yolk
of an egg. The air must be temperate; and as for her diet
let her abstain from all gross, vicious, and fat meats,
as pork, fish, old cheese, etc.

     SECT. VIII. Of the Straitness of the Womb, and its
Vessels.

     THIS is another effect of the womb, which is an
obstruction to the bearing of the children, as hindering
both the flowing of the  menstrues and conception, and is
seated in the vessels of the womb, and of the neck
thereof. The cause of, this straitness are thick and
rough humours, that stop the mouth of the veins and
arteries; these humours are bred of either gross or too
much nourishment: when the heat of the womb is so weak
that it cannot attenuate the humours, which, by reason
thereof, either flow from the whole body, or are gathered
into the womb. Now the vessels are made closer or
straiter several ways: Sometimes by inflammation,
schirrous, or other tumours; sometimes by compressions or
by a scar, or flesh, or membrane that grows after the
wound. The signs by which this is known are the stoppage
of the terms, not conceiving, crudities abounding in the
body, which are known by particular signs; for if there
was a wound, or the secundine was pulled out by force,
phlegm comes from the womb. If stoppage of the terms be
from an old obstruction by humours it is hard to be
cured; if it be only from the disorderly use of
astringents, it is more curable; if it be from a
schirrous of other tumours that compresseth or closeth
the vessels, the disease is incurable.

     For the cure of that which is curable obstructions
must be taken away, phlegm must be purged, and she must
be let blood, as will be hereafter directed in the
stoppage of the terms. Then use the following medicines:
take of aniseed and fennel-seed, each a dram; rosemary,
penny-royal, calamint, bettony flowers, each an ounce;
castus, cinnamon, galangal, each half an ounce; saffron
half a dram, with wine. Or take asparagus roots, parsley
roots, each an ounce; penny-royal, calamints, each a
handful; wall-flowers, dill-flowers, each two pugils;
boil, strain, and add syrup of mugwort, an ounce and a
half. For a fomentation, take penny-royal, mercury,
calamint, marjoram, mugwort, each two handfuls; sage,
rosemary, bays, camomile flowers, each a handful; boil
them in water and foment the groin and bottom of the
belly, or let her sit up to the navel in a bath and then
anoint about the groin with oil of rue, lilies, dill,
etc.

     SECT. IX. Of the Falling of the Womb.

     THIS is another evil effect of the womb, which is
both very troublesome, and also a hindrance to
conception. Sometimes the womb falleth to the middle of
the thighs, nay, almost to the knees, and may be known
then by its hanging out. Now that which causeth the womb
to change its place, is when the ligaments by which it is
bound to the other parts are not in order: for there are
four ligaments, two above, broad and membranous that come
from the peritoneum, and two below, that are nervous,
round, and hollow; it is also bound to the great vessels 
by veins and arteries, and to the back nerves; now the
place is changed when it is drawn another way, or when
the ligaments are loose, and it falls down by its own
weight. It is drawn on one side when the menstrues are
hindered from flowing, and the veins and arteries are
full family those which go to the womb. If it be a mole
on one side, the liver and spleen cause it; by the liver
veins on the right side and the spleen on the left, as
they are more or less filled. Others are of opinion it
comes from the solution of the connection of the fibrous
neck and the parts adjacent; and that is from the weight
of the womb descending: this we deny not; but the
ligaments must be loose or broken. But women in a dropsy
could not be said to have the womb fallen down if it come
only from looseness, but in them it is caused by the
saltness of the water, which dries more than it moistens.
Now if there be a little tumour within or without the
privities, like a skin stretched, or a weight felt about
the privities, it is nothing else but a descent of the
womb; but if there be a tumour like a goose egg, and a
hole at the bottom, there is at first a great pain in the
parts to which the womb is fastened, as the loins, the
bottom of the belly, and the os sacrum, which proceeds
from the breaking or stretching of the ligaments, but a
little after the pain is abated; and there is an
impediment in walking, and sometimes blood comes from the
breach of the vessels, and the excrements and urine are
stopped, and then a fever and convulsions ensueth, and
then it oftentimes proves mortal, especially if it
happens to women with child.

     For the cure of this distemper; first put it up
before the air alter it, or it be swollen or inflamed;
and therefore, first of all give a clyster to remove the
excrements, then lay her upon her back, with her legs
abroad, and thighs lifted up, and head down; then take
the tumour in your hand, and thrust it in without
violence; if it be swelled by alteration and cold, foment
it with the decoction of mallows, althea, line,
fenugreek, camomile flowers, bay berries, and anoint it
with oil of lilies and hen's grease. If there be an
inflammation, don't put it up, but fright it in, by
putting a red hot iron before it, and making a show as If
you intended to burn it, but first sprinkle upon it the
powder of mastich, frankincense and the like: thus take
frankincense, mastich, each two drams; sarcocol, steeped
in milk, a dram; mummy, pomegranate flowers, sanguis
draconis, each half a dram; when it is put up let her lie
with her legs stretched, and one upon he other, for eight
or ten days, and make a pessary in the form pear with
cork or sponge, and put it into the womb, dipped in sharp
wine, or juice of acacia, with powder of sanguis, with
galbanum, bedellium. Also apply a cupping-glass with
great flame under the navel or paps, or to both kidneys,
and lay this plaster to the back; take opoponix two
ounces, storax liquid half an ounce, mastich,
frankincense, pitch, bole, each two drams; then with wax
make a plaister, or, take laudanum a dram and a half, 
mastich and frankincense each a dram; ash-coloured
ambergrease four grains, musk half a scruple; make two
round plaisters to be laid on each side of the navel;
make a fume of snails' skins salted, or of garlic, and
let it be taken in by the funnel.  Use also astringent
fomentations of bramble leaves, plantain, horsetails,
myrtles, each two handfuls, wormseed two pugils,
pomegranate flowers half an ounce; boil them in wine and
water. For an injection take comfrey roots an ounce,
rupture-wort two drams, yarrow, mugwort, each half an
ounce, boil them in red wine, and inject it with a
syringe. To strengthen the womb, take hartshorn, bays, of
each a dram, myrrh half a dram; make a powder for two
doses, and give it with sharp wine. Or you may take
zedoary, parsnip seed, crabs' eyes prepared, each a dram;
nutmeg half a dram, and give a dram in powder: but
astringents must he used with great caution, lest by
stopping the courses a worse mischief follow. To keep it
in its place, make rollers and ligatures as for the
rupture, and put pessaries into the bottom of the womb,
that may force it to remain. I know some physicians
object, against this, and say they hinder conception: but
others in my opinion much more justly affirm, that they
neither hinder conception, nor bring any inconvenience;
nay, so far from that, they help conception and retain
it, and cure the disease perfectly. Let the diet be such
as has drying, astringent, and glowing qualities, such as
rice, starch, quinces, pears, and green cheese; but let
summer fruits be avoided; and let her wine be astringent
and red.


CHAPTER III.

OF DISEASES RELATING TO WOMEN'S MONTHLY COURSES.


     SECT. I. Of Women's Monthly Courses in General.

     THAT divine providence, which with a wisdom worthy
of itself, has appointed woman to conceive by coition
with the man, and to bear and bring forth children, has
provided for the nourishment of children during their
recess in the womb of their mother by that redundancy of
the blood which is natural to all women, and which,
flowing out at certain periods of time (when they are not
pregnant), are from thence called terms; and menses, from
their monthly flux of excrementious and unprofitable
blood; now that the matter flowing forth is
excrementious, is to be under stood only with respect to
the redundancy and over plus thereof, being an excrement
only with respect to its quantity; for as to its quality,
it is as pure and incorrupt as any blood in the veins;
and thus appears from the final cause of it, which is the
propagation and conversation of mankind; and also from
the generation of it, it being the superfluity of the
last aliment of the fleshy parts. If any ask if the
menstrues be not of a hurtful quality, how can it cause
such venomous effects; as if it fell upon trees and
herbs, it makes the one barren and mortifies the other? I
answer: This malignity is contracted in the womb: for the
woman wanting native heat to digest this superfluity,
sends it to the matrix, where, seating itself till the
mouth of the womb be dilated, it becomes corrupt and
mortified; which may easily be, considering the heat and
moistness of the place; and so this blood being out of
its proper vessels, and too long retained, offends its
quality. But if frigidity be the cause why women cannot
digest all their last nourishment, and by consequence
have these monthly purgations, how it comes to pass, may
some say, why they are of so cold a constitution more
thin men? Of this I have already spoken in the chapter of
barrenness; only chiefly thus: The author of our being
has Laid an injunction upon men and women to propagate
their kind, has also wisely fitted them for that work;
and seeing that in the act of coition there must be an
agent and a patient (for if they be of one constitution
there can be no propagation), there the man is hot and
dry, and the woman cold and moist; he is the agent, she
the patient or weaker vessel, that she might be subject
to the office of the man. It is therefore necessary that
the woman should be of a cold constitution, because in
her is required a redundancy of matter for the infant
depending on her; and this is wisely ordained by nature,
for otherwise the child would detract from and weaken the
principal parts of the mother, which would most naturally 
render the product of the infant the destruction of the
parent. Now these monthly purgations usually begin about
the fourteenth year, and continue till the forty-sixth or
fiftieth year; yet not so constantly but that oftentimes
there happens a suppression, which is sometimes natural
and sometimes morbifical; when they are naturally
suppressed, it is either in breeding women, or such as
give suck; but that which is morbifical must be the
subject of the following sections.

     SECT. II. Of the Suppression of the Monthly Courses.

     THE suppression of the terms, which is morbific, is
an interception of that accustomary evacuation of blood
which should come from the matrix every month, and which
proceeds from the matter vitiated. The cause of this
suppression is either internal or external; the internal
cause is either instrumental material in the blood or in
the womb. The blood may be faulty two ways; in quantity,
or in quality; in quantity, when it is so consumed that
there is no overplus left, as in viragoes and all virile
women, who, through their heat and strength of nature,
digest and consume all their best nourishment, but women
of this constitution are rather to be accounted
Anthropophagae, that is, women-eaters than women
breeders; because they consume one of the principals of
generation, which gives a being to the world, i.e., the
menstruous blood. The blood may also be consumed and the
terms stayed by too much bleeding at the nose; and
likewise by a flux of the haemorrhoids, or by a
dysenteria, evacuations and chronical and continued
diseases. But secondly, the matter may be vicious in
quality, as if it be sanguinous, phlegmatical, bilious or
melancholic; each of these, if they offend in grossness, 
will cause an obstruction in the veins.

     The womb also may be in the fault divers ways; as by
the narrowness of the veins and passages by aposthumes,
tumours, ulcers, and by overmuch cold and heat, the one
vitiating the action, and the other consuming the matter;
also by an evil composition of the matter; also by an
evil composition of the uterine parts, by the neck of the
womb being turned aside; and sometimes (though but
rarely), by a membrane or excrescence of flesh growing
about the womb.

     The external cause may be heat, or dryness of the
air, immoderate watching, great labour, violent motion,
whereby the matter is so consumed, and the body is so
exhausted, that there is no redundant blood remaining to
be expelled; where it is recorded of the Amazons, that
being active and always in motion, they had little or no
monthly fluxes; it may also be caused by cold; and most
frequently it is so, making the blood vicious and gross,
condensing and binding up the passages, that it cannot
flow forth. The signs of the disease are pains in the
head, neck, back and loins, with weariness of the whole
body, but especially of the hips and legs, by reason of a
confinity which the womb hath in those parts; if the
suppression proceeds from cold, it causes a heavy
sluggish disposition, a pale colour, a slow pulse, the
urine crude and waterish, and much in quantity, and no
desire to copulation, and excrements of the guts being
usually retained; but if it proceeds from heat, the signs
are contrary. If it be natural, or caused by conception,
it may be known by drinking water and honey after supper,
going to bed; for if, after taking it, it causeth the
woman to feel a bearing pain about the navel and lower
parts of the belly, it is a sign she hath conceived, and
that the suppression is natural; if not, then it is
vicious, and ought medicinally to be taken away;
otherwise many dangerous diseases will follow, such as
swoonings, faintings, intermission of pulse,
obstructions, chachexies, jaundice, dropsies, hardness of
the spleen, epilepsies, apoplexies, frensies, melancholy
passions, etc., which makes it highly necessary to say
something now of the cure.

     The cure of this distemper must be by evacuation,
for this suppression is a plethoric effect: it will
therefore be best in the midst if the menstrual period to
open the liver vein; and for the reversion of the humour
two days before the wonted evacuation, open the saphena
veins of both feet: and if the repletion be not great,
apply cupping glasses to the legs and thighs; after
letting blood, be humour must be prepared and made
flexible with syrup of staechas, horehound, hyson,
bettony, maiden-hair, of each one handful; make a
decoction, and take thereof three ounces; syrup of
mugwort, succory, maiden-hair, mix each half an ounce;
and after she comes out of the bath let her drink it off.
Then purge pil. de agaric, elephang, cooh. fadit. Galen
in this case commends pilula de hiera cum coloquintida;
for as they are proper to purge the humour offending, so
they open the passages of the womb. If the stomach be
overcharged, let her take a vomit; but if it be so
prepared as to act both ways, lest the humours should be
too much turned back by working only upwards; to which
end, take trochisk of Agaria two drams, infuse them in
three ounces of oximel, in which dissolve benedict.
laxat, half an ounce, and of the electuary diasarum one
scruple; and let her take it after the manner of a purge.
When the humour has been thus purged, you may proceed to
more proper and forcible remedies. Take an extract of
mugwort one scruple and a half, rinds of cassia, parsley
seed, castor, each a scruple; and with juice of smallage,
or after supper, going to bed. Also administer to the
lower parts by suffumigations, pessaries, unctions,
injections, and infusions; make suffumigations of amber,
galbanum, melanchum, bay-berries, mugwort, cinnamon,
nutmegs, cloves, etc. Make pessaries of figs and the
leaves of Mercury bruised, and rolled up with lint. Make
injections of the decoction of Mercury, bettony, origin,
mugwort, and figs, and inject it into the womb by an
instrument fit for that purpose. For unction, take
landant, oil of myrrh, of each two drams; oil of lilies,
almonds, capers, camomile, of each half an ounce; and
with wax make an unguent, with which let the place be
anointed.
Let the air be hot and dry, her sleep shorter than
ordinary; let her use moderate exercise before meals, and
let her meat and drink be attenuating.

     SECT. III. Of the Overflowing of the Monthly
Courses.

     This distemper is directly contrary to that of which
I have spoken in the foregoing section, and is no less
dangerous than the other, and therefore requires to be
spoken to next in order. This distemper is a sanguinous
excrement, proceeding from the womb, and exceeding in
time and quality. I call it sanguinous, because there are
two way by which the blood flows forth; one is by the
internal veins in the body of the womb, which is properly
called the monthly flux; the other is, by those veins
which are terminated in the neck of the matrix, which
some physicians called the haemorrhoids of the womb; and
that it exceeds in quantity when they flow about three
days; but this is the most certain sign of their excess
in flowing, when they flow so long that the faculties of
the body are thereby weakened; for in bodies abounding
with gross humours, this immoderate flux does sometimes
unburden nature of her load, and is not to be stopped
without advice from a physician.

     The cause of this immoderate flowing is either
external or internal; the external cause may be the heat
of the air, lifting and carrying heavy burden, unnatural
child-births, falls, etc. The internal cause may be
threefold: in the matter, instrument, or faculty; the
matter, which is the blood, may be vicious two ways;
first, in quantity, being so much that the veins are not
able to contain it; secondly, in quality, being adhust,
sharp, waterish, or unconcocted. The instrument, viz.,
the veins, are faulty by the dilatation of the orifice,
which may be caused two ways; first, by the heat of the
constitution, climate, or season, heating the blood,
whereby the passages are dilated, and the faculty
weakened, that it cannot retain in the blood; secondly,
by falls, blows, violent motion, breaking of a vein, etc.

     This inordinate flux may be known by the appetite's
being decayed, the concoction depraved, and all the
actions of the body weakened, the feet swelled, the
colour of the face changed, and a general feebleness
possessing the whole body. If it comes by the breaking of
a vein, the body is sometimes cold, the blood flows forth
on heaps, and that suddenly with great pain; if it comes
through heat, the orifice of the veins being dilated,
then there is little or no pain, yet the blood flows
faster than it does in an erosion, and not so fast as in
a rupture. If by erosion, or sharpness of blood, she
feels a great heat scalding the passage, it differs from
the other two in that it flows not so suddenly nor so
copiously as they do. If it be by weakness of the womb,
she has an aversion to copulation; if it proceeds from
the blood, drop some of it on a cloth, and when it is dry
you may judge of the quality by the colour; if it be
choleric, it will be yellow; if melancholy, black; if
phlegmatic, waterish and whitish.

     The cure of this consists in three particulars;
first, in repelling and carrying back the blood;
secondly, in correcting and taking away the fluxibility
of the matter; and thirdly, in corroborating the veins or
faculties. For the first, to cause a regression of the
blood, open a vein in her arm, and draw out so much blood
as the strength of the patient will permit, and that not
together, but at several times, for thereby the spirits
are less weakened, and the retraction so much the better.
Apply the cupping-glass to the liver, that the reversion
may be in the fountain. To correct the fluxibility of the
matter, cathartical means, moderated with astrictories,
may be used. If it be caused by sharpness of blood,
consider whether the erosion be by salt phlegm or a dust
colour: if by salt phlegm, prepare with syrup of violets,
wormwood, roses, citron peels, succory, etc.; then take
this purgation following: mirobolana, cherbul half an
ounce, trochisks of agaric, one dram; with plantain water
make a decoction; add thereto syr. rosat. lux three
ounces, and make a potion. If by a dust colour, prepare
the body with syrup of roses, myrtles, sorrel, purslain
mixed with water of plantain, knot grass and endive, then
purge with this potion: take rinds of mirobolana,
rhubarb, of each one dram, cinnamon fifteen grains;
infuse them one night in endive water; add to it the
straining pulp of roses one ounce, and make a potion. If
the blood be waterish and unconcocted, as it is in
hydroptical bodies, and flows forth by reason of the
tenury, to draw off the water will be profitable; to
which end, purge with agarci, elaterium, and
coloquintida: Sweating is also very proper in this case,
for by it the matter offending is taken away, and the
motion of the blood is carried to the outward parts. To
procure sweat, use cardamom water with mithridate; or the
decoction of guiacum does also greatly provoke sweat: and
pills of sarsaparilla taken every night going to bed, are
worthily commended. If the blood flows forth from the
opening or breaking of a vein, without any evil quality
of itself, then ought corroboratives only to be applied,
which is the thing to be done in this inordinate flux:
bole armoniac one scruple, London treacle one dram, old
conserve of roses half an ounce, with syrup of myrtles,
make an electuary. Or, if the flux has continued long,
take. of mastich two drams, olibani, tyoch. de careble,
of each one dram; balanstium one scruple, make a powder;
with syrup of quinces make it into pills, and take one
always before meals.

     SECT. IV. Of Terms coming out of order, either
before or after the usual Time.

     BOTH these have an ill constitution of body; every
thing is beautiful in its order, in nature as well as in
morality; and if the order of nature be broken, it shows
the body to be out of order; of each of these effects
briefly.

     When the monthly courses come before their time, it
shows a depraved excretion that comes for the time, often
flowing sometimes twice a month; the cause why they come
sooner is in the blood, which stirs up the expulsive
faculty in the womb, or sometimes in the whole body,
caused oftentimes by the person's diet, which increases
the blood too much, makes it too sharp or too hot; and if
the retentive faculty of the womb be weak and the
expulsive faculty strong, and of a quick sense, it brings
them forth the sooner; and sometimes they flow sooner by
reason of a fall, stroke, or some violent passion which
the parties themselves can best relate. If it be from
heat, thin and sharp humours, it is known by the
distemper of the whole body. The looseness of the
vessels, and weakness of the retentive faculty, is known
from a moist and loose habit of body. It is more
troublesome than dangerous, but hinders conception, and
therefore the awe is necessary for all, but especially
such as desire children. If it proceeds from a sharp
blood, let her temper it by a good diet, and medicines.
To which purpose let her use baths of iron water that
correct the distemper of the bowels, and then evacuate.
If it proceeds from the retentive faculty, and looseness
of the vessels it is to be corrected with gentle
astringents.

     As to the courses flowing after the usual time, the
causes are thickness of the blood, and the smallness of
the quantity, with straightness of the passage and
weakness of the expulsive faculties, either of these
singly may stop the courses, but if they all concur, they
render the distemper the worse. If the blood abounds not
in such a quantity as may stir up nature to expel it, its
purging must necessarily be deferred till there be
enough. And if the blood be thick, the passage stopped
and the expulsive faculties weak, the menses must needs
be out of order, and the purging of them retarded.

     For the cure of this, if the quantity of blood be
small, let her use a larger diet, and very little
exercise. If the blood be thick and foul, let it be made
thin, and the humours mixed therewith be evacuated. It is
good to purge after the courses have done flowing, and to
use calamints; and indeed the oftener she purges the
better. She may also use fumes and necessaries, apply
cupping glasses without scarification to the inside of 
the thighs, and rub the legs, and scarify the ankles, and
hold the feet in warm water four or five days before the
courses come down. Let her also anoint the bottom of her
belly with things proper to provoke the terms.

     SECT. V. Of the false Courses or Whites.

     THE whites or false courses are a foul excretion
from the womb; for from the womb proceeds not only the
menstruous blood, but accidentally many other excrements,
which is a distillation of a variety of corrupt humours
through the womb, flowing from the whole body, or part of
the same; which, though called the whites, are sometimes
blue, or green, or reddish, not flowing at a set time  or
every month but in a disorderly manner, sometimes longer,
and sometimes shorter. It is different from the running
of the reins, being both less in quantity, and whiter and
thicker in quality, and coming at a greater distance; it
is different also from those night pollutions, which is
only in sleep, and proceed from the imagination of
venery.

     The cause of this distemper is either promiscuously
in the whole body, by a cacochymia, or weakness of the
same, or in some of the parts; as in the liver, which, by
the inability of the sanguificative faculty, causeth a
generation of corrupt blood, and then the matter is
reddish: sometimes in the gall being remiss in its
office, not drawing away those choleric superfluities
which are engendered in the liver, and then the matter is
yellowish; sometimes in the spleen, not defecating and
cleansing the blood of the excrementious parts, and then
the matter flowing forth is blackish. It may also come
from catarrhs in the head, or from any other putrefied or
corrupt member. But if the matter of the flux be whiter,
the case is either in the stomach or reins. In the
stomach, by a phlegmatical and crude matter there
contracted and vitiated through grief, melancholy and
other distempers; for otherwise, if the matter were only
pituitous, and no ways corrupt or vitiated, being taken
into the liver, it might be converted into blood; for
phlegm in the ventricle is called nourishment half
digested. But being corrupt, though it be sent into the
liver, it cannot correct that which the first hath
corrupted, and therefore the liver sends it to the womb,
which can neither digest it nor repel it, and so it is
voided out, still keeping the colour which it had in the
ventricle. The cause also may be in the veins being over-
heated, whereby the spermatical matter, by reason of its
tenuity, flows forth. The external cause may be the
moistness of the air, eating corrupt meats, anger, grief,
slothfulness, immoderate sleeping, and costiveness.

     The signs are, extenuation of body, shortness and
stinking breath, loathing of meat, pain in the head,
swelling of the eyes, melancholy, humidity, flowings from
the womb of divers colours, as reddish, black, green,
yellow, white: it is known from the overflowing of the
courses in that it keeps no certain periods, and is of so
many colours, all which do degenerate from blood.

     For the cure of this, it must be by methods adapted
to the case; and as the causes are various, so must be
the cure.

     If it be caused by the distillation from the brain,
take syrup of bettony, staechas and marjoram, purge with
pilloch, napalia, of the juice of sage, hyssop, bettony,
negalia, with one drop of oil of cloves, and a little
silk cotton. Take elect. dianth. aromat. rosar. diamore,
diamosci, dulcis, of each one dram; nutmeg, half a dram
at night going to bed.

     If the manner flowing forth be reddish, open a vein
in the arm; if not, apply ligatures to the arms and
shoulders; some have cured this distemper by rubbing the
upper parts with crude honey; and so Galen says he cured
the wife of Boetius.

     If it proceeds from crudities in the stomach, or
from a cold distempered liver, take every morning of the
decoction of lignum sanctum; purge with pill. de agarico,
de hermodact, de Hiera diacolocynthid. foetida.
agragrative. Take of elect, aromat. ros. two drams,
citron peel dried, nutmeg, long pepper, of each one
scruple; diagalinga one dram, santali alba, ligni aloes,
of each half a scruple; sugar six ounces; with mint water
make lozenges of it, and then take it after meals.

     If with frigidity of the liver be joined a
repression of the stomach, purging by vomiting is
commendable; for which take three drams of the electuary
of diaru. Some physicians also allow of the dieurical
means, as of opium, petrosolinum, etc.

     If the matter of the syrup be melancholous, prepare
with syrup of maiden-hair, epithimum, polypody, burrage,
bugloss, sumetary, hart's tongue, and syrup of
bysantinum, which must be made without vinegar, otherwise
it will rather animate the disease than strengthen
nature; for melancholy by the use of vinegar is
increased, and by Hippocrates, Silvius, and Aventinus, it
is disallowed of as an enemy to the womb, and therefore
not to be used inwardly in uterine diseases: purges of
melancholy are, pilulae eumartae, pilulae indae, pilulae
de lap. Lazuli liosena, and confectio hameigh. Take of
stamped prunes two ounces, senna one dram, epithimum,
polypody, sumetary, of each a dram and a half; sour
dates, one ounce, with endive water make a decoction;
take of it four ounces; add unto it confectionis aamech
three drams, manna three drams. Or, pil indatum, pil
foetidarum, agarici trochisacri, of each one scruple,
lapis lazuli, five grains, with syrup of erithimum make
pills, and take one every week.

     If the matter of the flux be choleric, prepare with
syrup of endive, violets, succory, roses, and purge with
mirobolana, manna, rhubarb, cassia; take of rhubarb two
drams, aniseed one dram, cinnamon a scruple and a half;
infuse them in six ounces of prune broth; add to the
straining of manna an ounce, and take it according to
art. Take spicicrum diatrionsontalon, diatragacant. frig.
diarrhod. abbatis diaccnit, of each a dram, sugar four
ounces, with plantain water make Lozenges.

     Lastly, let the womb be cleansed from the corrupt
matter, and then corroborated; and for the cleansing
thereof, make injections of tho decoction of bettony,
feverfew, mugwort, spikenard, bistort, mercury, sage,
adding thereto sugar, oil of sweet almonds, of each two
ounces. Then to corroborate the womb, prepare trochisks
in this manner: take of myrrh, feverfew, mugwort,
nutmegs, mace, amber, ligni, aloes, storax, red roses, of
each one ounce, with mucilage of tragacanth make
trochisks: cast them on the coals, and smother the womb
therewith; fomentations may be also made for the womb of
red wine, in which has been decocted mastich, fine bole,
balustia and red roses; drying diet is best, because this
distemper usually abounds with phlegmatic and crude
humours. Immoderate sleep is hurtful, but moderate
exercise will do well.

     Thus have I gone through the principal effects
peculiar to the female sex; and prescribed for each of
them such remedies as, with the divine blessing, will
cure their distempers, confirm their health, and remove
all those obstructions which might otherwise prevent
their bearing children; and I have brought it into so
narrow a compass, that it might be of the more general
use, being willing to put it into every one's power, that
has occasion for it, to purchase this rich treasure at an
easy rate.


ARISTOTLE'S PROBLEMS.

Of the Face and Hair


     AMONG all living creatures, why hath man only his
countenance lifted up towards heaven?

     Unto this question there are divers answers.

     First, It proceeds from the will of the Creator. And
although the answer be true, yet In this our purpose It
seemeth not to be of force, because that so all questions
easily might be resolved.

     Secondly, I answer, that for the most part every
workman doth make his first work worse, and then his
second better: So God, creating all other beasts before
man, gave them their face looking down to the earth. And
then, secondly, he created man, as it doth appear in
Genesis, unto whom he gave an honest shape, lifted unto
heaven, because it is drawn from divinity, and  doth also
derogate from the goodness of God, who maketh all His
works perfect and good.

     Thirdly, It is answered that man only among all
living creatures is ordained to the kingdom of heaven,
and therefore hath his face elevated and lifted up to
heaven, because that, despising worldly and earthly
things, be ought to contemplate on heavenly things.

     Fourthly, That the reasonable is like unto angels,
and finally ordained towards God; as it appears by
Averrois, in the first de Anima; and therefore he hath a
figure looking upward.

     Fifthly, That a man is a microcosm, that is, a
little world, as it pleaseth Aristotle to say in the
eighth of this work, and therefore he doth command all
other living creatures and they obey him.

     Sixthly, It is answered, that naturally there is
unto everything and every work that form and figure given
which is fit and proper for its motion; as unto the
heaven roundness, to the fire a pyramidal form, that is
broad beneath and sharp towards the top, which form is
most apt to ascend; and so man had his face up to heaven,
to behold the wonders of God's works.

     Why is the head of beasts hairy?

     The answer, according to the opinion of Const is,
that the  hairs are the ornament of the head and of the
brain, and the brain is purged and evacuated of gross
humour by the growing of the hair, from the highest unto
the lowest parts, which pass through the pores of the
exterior flesh and do become dry, and are converted into
hairs. This appears to be true, because that in all man's
body there is nothing drier than the hairs; for they are
drier than the bones, as Albertus Magnus doth affirm,
because that some beasts are nourished with bones, as
dogs, but no beast can digest feathers or hair, but do
avoid them undigested; and they are too hot for nutriment

     Secondly, It is answered, that the brain is purged
four manner of ways; first, of superfluous watery humours
by the eyes, from melancholy by the ears, and of choler
by the nose, phlegm by the hair, and that is the intent
of the physician.

     Why have men longer hair on their heads than other
living creatures?

     Arist. de Generat. Anim. says, That men have the
moistest brain of all living creatures, from which the
seed proceedeth, which is converted into the long hair of
the head.

     Secondly, It is answered, that the humours of man
are fat, and do not dry easily, and therefore the hair
groweth long in him. In other beasts the humours easily
dry, and therefore the hair groweth not so long.

     Why doth the hair take deeper root in man's skin
than in other living creatures?

     Because they have a greater store of nourishment in
man, and therefore grow more into the inward parts of
man. And this is also the reason why in other creatures
the hair doth alter and change with the skin, and not in
man, unless it be sometimes a scar or wound.

     Why have women longer hair than men?

     Because women are moister than men, and phlegmatic,
and therefore there is more matter of hair in them, and
by consequence the length also of their hair doth follow.
And furthermore, this matter is more increased in women
than in men from their interior parts, and especially in
the time of their monthly terms, because the matter doth
then ascend, whereby the humour which breedeth the hair
doth increase. And Albertus doth say that if the hair of
a woman in the time of her flowers be put into dung, a
venomous serpent is engendered of it.

     The second answer is, because women want beards, and
so the matter of the beard doth go into the matter of the
hair.

     Why have some men soft hair and some hard?

     We answer with Aristotle, that the hair hath
proportion with the skin, of which some is hard, some
thick, some subtile and soft, and some gross; therefore
the hair which groweth out of a thick and gross skin is
thick and gross, and that which groweth of a subtile and
fine is fine and soft, and when the pores are open then
cometh forth much humour, and therefore hard hair is
engendered; and when the pores are strait, then there
doth grow soft and fine hair. And this doth Aristotle
show in men, in whom we have an eminent token, because
women have softer hair than they; because that in women
the pores are shut, and are strait by reason of their
coldness.

     Secondly, Because that for the most part choleric
men have hard and thicker hair than others, by reason of
their heat, and because the pores are for ever open in
them, and therefore they have beards sooner than others.
Whereupon the philosopher saith, that those beasts which
have hard hair are the boldest, because such hair
proceedeth of heat and choler, which choler maketh man
fight. Aristotle also giveth example in the bear and the
boar; and contrariwise, those beasts that have soft are
fearful, because they be cold, as the hare and hart.
Aristotle doth give another reason of the softness and
hardness of the hair, drawn from the climate where a man
is born; because that in hot regions hard and gross hair
is engendered, as it appears in the Ethiopians; and the
contrary is true in the cold country, as towards the
North.

     Why have some men curled hair and some smooth?

     The answer is, That the cause of the curling of the
hair is great abundance of heat in a man, then the hair
doth curl and grow upward. And a sign of this proved
true, because that sometimes a man doth enter into a bath
smooth haired, and afterwards by the bath becometh
curled. And therefore the keepers of baths have often
curled hair, as also the Ethiopians and choleric men. But
the cause of the smoothness is the  abundance of moist
humours which tend downwards and a proof of this is,
because they have much humidity in them and small heat.

     Why do women show their ripeness by their hair in
their privy parts, and not elsewhere, but men in their
breasts?

     We answer, physician like, because in men and women
there is abundance of humidity in that place, but more in
women, because men have the mouth of the bladder in that
place where the urine is contained, of which the hair in
the breasts is engendered, and about the navel. But of
women it is that the humidity of the bladder, and of the
matrix or womb, is joined, and meeteth in that low secret
place; and therefore is dissolved and separated in that
place through much vapours and fumes, which are the cause
of hair. And the like doth happen In other places where
hair is under the arms.

     Why have not women beards?

     Because they want heat, as appeareth in some
effeminate men, who are beardless for the same cause,
because they have the complexion of a woman.

     Why doth the hair grow in them that are hanged?

     Because their bodies are exposed to the sun which
through its heat doth dissolve all the moisture into a
fume or vapour, of which the hair doth grow and increase.

     Why is the hair of the beard thicker and grosser
than elsewhere, and the more men are shaven, the harder
and thicker it groweth?

     Because, according to the rule of the physicians, by
how much more the humour or vapour of any liquid is
dissolved and taken away, by so much the more humour
remaining doth draw to the same; and therefore, by how
much the more the hair is shaven, so much the humours
gather thicker; and of them hair is engendered, and doth
there also wax hard.

     Why are women smooth and fair in respect of men?

     The answer is, according unto Aristotle de Generat.
Animal, because that in women all humidity and
superfluity, which are the matter and cause of the hair
of the body, is expelled with their monthly terms; the
which superfluity remaineth in men, and through vapours
do pass into the hair. And a sign of this is, because
women having running at the nose, or imposthume or ulcer,
no such matter is expelled also. And we see some old
women begin to have beards in their old age, that is,
after forty of fifty years of age, when their flowers are
ceased; as Aristotle doth teach, de Animal, lib. 9.

     Why doth man only, above all other creatures, wax
hoary and grey, as Pythagoras and Aristotle affirm?

     The answer according unto the philosophers is,
because man hath the hottest heart of all living
creatures; and therefore nature being more wise, lest a
man should be suffocated through the heat of his heart,
hath placed the heart, which is most hot, under the
brain, which is most cold; to the end, that the heat of
the heart may be tempered with the coldness of the brain,
and contrariwise, that the coldness of the brain may be
heated with the heat of the heart, and thereby there
might be a temperature in both. A sign to prove this is,
because of all living creatures man hath the worst breath
if he comes to his full age. Furthermore, man doth
consume half his time in sleeping, which doth proceed
from the great access of the coldness and moisture of the
brain, and by that means doth want natural heat to digest
and consume that moistness; the heat which he hath
sufficiently in his youth; and therefore the vapours
ascending from the stomach remain undigested and
unconsumed for want of natural heat, and there putrefies,
of which putrefaction of humours the whiteness doth
follow, which is called greyness or hoariness. Whereby it
doth appear, that hoariness is nothing else but a
whiteness of hair caused by the putrefaction of humours
about the roots of the hair through want of natural heat
in old age. Sometimes also greyness is caused by the
naughtiness of the complexion, which may well happen in
youth, and sometimes by reason of the moisture
undigested, and sometimes through over-great fear and
care, as it appeareth in merchants, sailors, thieves:
from whence cometh this verse:
"Cura facit canoi, quam vis homo non habet annos."

     Why doth red hair grow white sooner than other?

     According to the opinion of Aristotle, because
redness is an infirmity of the hair, for it is engendered
of a weak and infirm matter; that is to say, of matter
corrupted with the flowers of the woman, and therefore
they wax white sooner than black hair.

     Why do wolves grow grisly?

     The better to understand this question, note the
difference between greyness and grisling; because that
greyness is caused through the defect of natural heat,
but grisliness through devouring and heating. The wolf
being a devouring beast, and an eater, he letteth it down
gluttonously without chewing, and that enough at once for
three days, by which meat gross vapours are engendered in
the wolf's body and by consequence grisliness. Secondly:
greyness and grisliness do differ, because greyness is
only in the head, and grisliness over all the body.

     Why do horses grow grisly and grey?

     According to Aristotle, because they are for the
most part in the sun; and in his opinion also heat doth
accidentally cause putrefaction; and therefore that kind
of heat the matter of hair doth putrefy, and by
consequence they are quickly pilled.

     Why do men become bald, and trees let fall their
leaves in the winter?

     Aristotle doth give the same reason for both;
because that the want of moisture in both is the cause of
the want of the hair and of the leaves; and this is
proved, because that a man becometh bald through venery,
because that is letting forth of natural humidity and
heat. And so by that excess in carnal pleasure moisture
is consumed which is the nutriment of the hair and
therefore baldness doth ensue. And this is evidently
proved in eunuchs and women who do not grow bald, because
they do not depart from their moistness; and therefore
eunuchs are of the complexion of women. But if you ask
why eunuchs be not bald, nor have the gout, as
Hippocrates saith, the answer is, according to Galen,
because the cause of baldness is dryness, the which is
not in eunuchs because they want their stones, the which
do minister heat unto all parts of the body, and the heat
doth open the pores, which being open, the hair doth
fall.

     Why are not women bald?

     Because they are cold and moist, which are the
causes that the hair remaineth; for moistness doth give
nutriment to the hair, and coldness doth bind the pores.

     Why are bald men deceitful, according to the verse:
"Si non vis falli, fugius consertia clavi"?

     Because baldness doth witness a choleric complexion,
whith is hot and dry; and choleric men are naturally
deceitful, according to the verse:
"Hirsutus, fallax, irascens, prodigus, audax."

     And therefore it followeth, "a primo ad ultimum,"
that bald men are deceitful and crafty.

     Why are not blind men naturally bald?

     Because that, according to Aristotle, the eye hath
most moisture in it, and that moisture which should pass
through by the substance of the eyes doth become a
sufficient nutriment of the
hair, and therefore they are seldom bald.

     Why doth hair stand on end when men are afraid?

     Because in the time of fear the heat doth go from
the outward part of the body into the inward, to the
intent to help the heart; and so the pores in which the
hair are fastened are shut up: after which stopping and
shutting up of the pores the standing up of the hair doth
follow, as it is seen in beasts, as dogs, wild boars, and
peacocks.


Of the Head.


     Why is a man's head round?

     Because this is most fit to receive anything into
it, as Aristotle doth affirm, lib. de cael., and the head
doth contain in it five senses. This is also seen in a
material sphere.

     Why is the head round?

     Aristotle saith, because it doth contain in it the
moistest parts of the living creatures, and also because
the brain may be defended thereby as with a shield.

     Why is the head absolutely long, but somewhat round?

     To the end the three creeks and cells of the brain
might better be distinguished; that is the fancy in the
forehead, the discoursing  or reasonable pert in the
middle, and memory in the hindermost part.

     Why doth a man lift up his head towards the heavens
when he doth imagine?

     Because the imagination is in the forepart of the
head or brain, and therefore it lifteth up itself, that
the creeks or cells of the imagination may be opened, and
that the spirits which help the imagination, and are fit
for that purpose, having their concourse thither, may
help the imagination.

     Why doth a man when he museth, or thinketh on things
past, look down towards the earth?

     Because the cell or creek which is behind is the
creek or chamber of memory, and therefore that looketh
towards heaven when the head is bowed down; and so that
cell is open, to the end that the spirits which perfect
the memory should enter in.

     Why is not the head fleshy, like other parts of the
body?

     Because that, according to Aristotle, the head would
be too heavy, and would not stand steadfastly; and
therefore it is without flesh. Also a head loaded with
flesh doth betoken an evil complexion.

     Why is the head subject to aches and griefs?

     According unto Constant, by reason of evil humours
which proceed from the stomach, ascend up to the head,
and disturb the brain, and so cause the pain in the head.
And sometimes it proceeds from over-much filling the
stomach, because, according unto the opinion of Galen,
two great sinews pass from the brain to the mouth of the
stomach, and therefore these two parts do suffer grief
always together. Sometimes the headache doth proceed of
drinking strong wine, of fuming meats, as garlic or
onion, and sometimes of phlegm in the stomach, whereof
spring quotidian fevers.

     Why have women the headache more often than men?

     Albertus saith that it is by reason of their monthly
terms, which men are not troubled with, and so a moist,
unclean, and venomous fume is dissolved, the which
seeking passage upward. dub cause the headache.

     Why is the brain white?

     There are two answers: the first, because it is
cold, and coldness is the mother of white: the
philosophers do teach the second, because it may have the
similitude and likeness of all colours, which the white
colour may best do, because it is most simple.

     Why are all the senses in the head?

     Because, as Albertus saith, the brain is there, on
which all the senses do depend and are directed by it;
and by consequence it maketh all the spirits to feel, and
by it all the membranes are governed.

     Why cannot a man escape death if the brain or heart
be hurt?

     Because the brain and heart are two of the most
principal parts which concern life, and therefore if they
be hurt there is no remedy left for cure.

     Why is the brain moist?

     Because it may easily receive an impression, which
moisture can best do, as it appeareth in wax, which doth
easily receive the print of the seal when it is soft.

     Why is the brain cold?

     This is answered two ways: first, because that by
this coldness it may clear the understanding of a man,
and make it subtile. Secondly, that, by the coldness of
the brain the heat of the heart may be tempered; and this
is Aristotle's intent. Lib. de animal.


Of the Eyes.


     WHY have you one nose and two eyes?

     Because our light is more necessary for us than the
smelling; and therefore it doth proceed from the goodness
of Nature, that if we receive any hurt or loss of one
eye, that yet the other should remain; unto the which the
spirit with which we see, called Spiritus Visus, is
directed when the other is out.

     Why have children in their youth great eyes, and why
do they become smaller and lesser in their age?

     According to Aristotle de Generat, it proceedeth
from the want of fire, and from the assembling and
meeting together of light and humour, the eyes which are
lightened by reason of the sun, which doth lighten the
easy humour of the eye, and purge it, and in the absence
of the sun those humours become dark and black, and
therefore the sight not so good.

     Why does the bluish-grey eye see badly in the day
time and well at night?

     Because, said Aristotle, greyness is light and
shining of itself, and the spirits with which we see are
weakened in the day time, and strengthened in the night.

     Why be men's eyes of divers colours?

     This proceedeth, saith Aristotle, by reason of the
diversity of the humours; the eye therefore hath four
coverings and three humours: the first covering is called
consolidative, which is the uttermost, and strong and
fat. The second is called a horny skin and covering to
the likeness of a horn, and that is a clear covering. The
third is called Uvea, of the likeness of a black grape.
The fourth is called a cobweb. But according to the
opinion of some, the eye doth consist of seven coverings
or skins, and three humours. The first humour is called
abungines, for the likeness unto the white of an egg. The
second glarial, that is clear, like unto ice or
crystalline. The third vitreous, that is clear as glass.
And the diversity of humour causeth the diversities of
the eye.

     Why are men who have but one eye good archers? and
why do good archers commonly shut one eye? and why do
such as behold the stars look through a trunk with one
eye?

     This matter is handled in the perspective arts, and
the Mason is, as it doth appear in the book of causes,
because that every virtue and strength united knit
together, is stronger than itself dispersed and
scattered. Therefore all the force of seeing dispersed in
two eyes, the one being shut, is gathered into the other,
and so the light is fortified in him, and by the
consequence he doth see better and more certainly with
one eye being shut than two being open.

     Why do such as drink much and laugh much shed much
tears? 
     Because that whilst they drink and laugh
without measure, the air which is drawn in doth not pass
out through the windpipe, and so with force is directed
and sent to the eyes, and by their pores passing out doth
expel the humours of the eyes, the which humour being so
expelled do bring tears.

     Why do such as weep much urine but little?

     Because (saith Aristotle) the radical humidity of a
tear and of urine is of one and the same nature; and
therefore where weeping doth increase their urine doth
diminish; and that they be of one nature is plain to the
taste, because they are both salt.

     Why do some that have clear eyes see nothing at all?

     By reason of the oppilation and naughtiness of the
sinews with  which: we see; for the temples being
destroyed, the strength of the light cannot be carried
from the brain to the eye, as the philosopher doth teach,
lib. de sen. and senatio.

     Why is the eye clear and smooth like unto glass?

     Because the things which may be seen are better
beaten back from a smooth thing than otherwise, that
thereby the sight should strengthen.

     Secondly, I answer it is because the eye is very
moist above all parts of the body, and of a waterish
nature; and as the water is clear and smooth, so likewise
is the eye.

     Why do men who have their eyes deep in their heads
see well afar off, and the like in beasts?

     Because, saith Aristotle (2 de Gener. Animal), the
force and power by which we see is dispersed in them, and
doth go directly to the thing which is seen. And this is
proved by a similitude, because that when a man doth
stand in a deep ditch or well, he doth see in the day
time, standing in those places, the stars of the
firmament; as Aristotle doth teach in his treatise De
Formula Specula; because that then the power of the sight
and of the beams are not scattered.

     Wherefore do those men that have their eyes far out
and not deep in their head see but meanly, and not far
distant?

     Because, saith Aristotle, the beams of the sight
which pass from the eye are scattered on every side, and
go directly unto the thing that is seen, and therefore
the sight is weakened.

     Why are many beasts born blind, as lions' whelp. and
dogs' whelps?

     Because such beasts are not yet of perfect ripeness
and maturity, and the course of nutriment doth not work
in them. And this is proved by a similitude of the
swallow, whose eyes, if they were taken out when they are
little ones in the nest, would grow again; and this is
plain in many other beasts, which are brought forth
before their time as it were dead, as bear whelps. And
this reason doth belong rather to the perspective than
the natural philosopher.

     Why do the eyes of a woman that hath her flowers
stain a new glass, as Aristotle saith, de somno and
vigil.; and this is the like problem, why doth a basilisk
kill a man with his sight?

     To the first I answer, that when the flowers do run
from a woman, then a most venomous air is dissolved in
them, which doth ascend unto the woman's head; and she
having grief of her head, doth cover it with many veils
and kerchiefs; and because the eyes are full of small
insensible holes, which are called pores, there the air
seeketh a passage, and so doth infect the eyes, which are
full of blood. And their eyes do appear also dropping and
full of tears, by reason of the evil vapour that is in
them, and those vapours are incorporated and multiplied,
until they come unto the glass before them; and by reason
that such a glass is found, clear, and smooth, is doth
easily receive that which is unclean.

     To the second it is answered that the basilisk is a
very venomous and infected beast, and that there pass
from his eye venomous vapours, which are multiplied upon
the thing which is seen by him, and even unto the eye of
man; the which venomous vapours or humours entering into
the body do infect him, and so in the end the man dieth.
And this is also the reason why the basilisk, looking
upon a shield perfectly well made with fast clammy pitch,
or any hard smooth thing, doth kill himself, because the
humours are beaten back from the smooth hard thing unto
the basilisk, by which beating back he is killed. And 
the like is said of a woman when she hath her monthly
disease, whereof it followeth that some old women do hurt
themselves when they look upon glasses, or other firm and
solid thing, in the time of their terms.

     Why are not sparkling cats' and wolves' eyes seen in
the light and not in the dark?

     Because that the greater light doth darken the
lesser, and therefore in a greater light the sparkling
cannot be seen, but the greater the darkness the easier
it is seen, and is made more strong and shining, because
it is not then hindered by a greater external light,
which might darken it.

     Why doth a man beholding himself in a glass
presently forget his own disposition?

     Answer is made in lib. de forma speculi that the
image seen by the glass doth represent it weakly and
indirectly to the power of the sight; and because it is
represented weakly, it is also weakly apprehend, and by
consequence is not long retained.

     Why is the sight recreated and refreshed by a green
colour, as this verse showeth:
"Fens, speculum gramen oculis sunt aleviamen"?

     Because the green colour doth meanly move the
instrument of sight, and therefore doth comfort the
sight; but this doth not black nor white colours, because
the colours do vehemently stir and alter the organ and
instrument of the light, and therefore make the greater
violence, but by how much the more violent the thing is
which is felt or seen, the more it doth destroy and
weaken the sense, as Aristotle doth teach, lib. 2, do
animal.


Of the Nose.


     Why doth the nose stand out farther than other parts
of the body?

     There are two answers: the first, because the nose
is as it were the sink of the brain, by which the phlegm
of the brain is purged, and therefore it doth stand
forth, lest the other parts should be defiled; the second
(according to Constant.), is because the nose is the
beauty of the face, and therefore it doth show itself,
and shine. It doth smell also, and adorn the face, as
Boetius saith, de discip. school.

     Why hath man the worst smell of all living
creatures, as it doth appear lib. de animal?

     Because the man (as the commentator saith), in
respect of his quantity hath the most brain of all
creatures; and therefore by that exceeding coldness and
moistness the brain wanteth a good disposition, and by
consequence the smelling instrument is not good, as
Aristotle and Themistocles do teach; yea, some men there
be which do not smell at all.

     Why do the vulture or cormorant smell very well, as
the commentator doth say?

     Because they have a very dry brain, and therefore
the air carrying the smell is not hindered by the
humidity of the brain, but doth presently touch its
instrument; and therefore he saith, that the vultures,
tigers, and other beasts, came five hundred miles to the
dead bodies after a battle in Greece.

     Why did nature make the nostrils?

     For three commodities. First, because that the mouth
being shut, we draw breath in by the nostrils to refresh
the heart with. The second commodity is, because that the
air which proceedeth from the mouth doth savour badly,
because of the vapours which rise from the stomach, but
that which we breathe from the nose is not noisome. The
third is, because the phlegm which doth proceed from the
brain is purged by them.

     Why do men sneeze?

     Because that the expulsive virtue of power and the
sight should thereby be purged, and the brain also from
superfluities, because that the lungs are purged by
coughing, so is the sight and brain by sneezing; and
those who sneeze often are said to have a strong brain;
and therefore the physicians give sneezing medicants to
purge the brain, and such sick persons as cannot sneeze
die quickly, because it is a sign the brain is wholly
stuffed with evil humours, which cannot be purged.

     Why do such as are apoplectic sneeze; that is, such
as are subject easily to bleed?

     Because the passages or ventricles of the brain are
stopped in them; and if they could sneeze, their apoplexy
would be loosed.

     Why doth the heat of the sun provoke sneezing, and
not the heat of the fire?

     Because the heat of the sun doth mow dissolve and
not consume; and therefore the vapour dissolved is
expelled by sneezing; but the heat of the fire doth
dissolve and consume, and therefore rather doth hinder
sneezing than provoke.


Of the Ears.

     Why do beasts move their ears and not men?

     Because there is a certain muscle near unto the jaw
which doth cause motion in the ear; and therefore, that
muscle being extended and stretched, men do not move
their ear, as it hath been seen in divers men, but all
beasts do use that muscle or fleshy sinew, and therefore
do move their ears.

     Why is rain prognosticated by the pricking up of
asses' ears?

     Because the ass is a very melancholy beast, and it
proceedeth from melancholy that he doth foresee rain to
come. In the time of rain all beasts do prick up their
ears, and therefore the ass, perceiving that it will
rain, doth prick up his ears before it come.

     Why have some beasts no ears?

     Aristotle doth answer and say, that nature doth give
unto every thing that which is fit for it; but if she
should have given birds ears, their flying would have
been hindered by them; likewise fish do want ears,
because they would hinder their swimming, and have only
certain little holes through which they hear, as
Aristotle declares by the sea-calf.

     Why have bats ears, seeing they seem to be birds?

     Because they are partly birds in nature, in that
they do fly, by reason whereof they have wings, and
pertly they are hairy, because they are mice; therefore
nature, as being wise gave them ears.

     Why have men only round ears?

     Because the shape of the whole and of the parts
should be proportionable, and especially, in all things
of one nature; or as a drop of water is round, so th.
whole water, John de sacro Bosco doth prove; and so
because a man's head is round, the ears incline towards
the same figure; but the heads of beasts are somewhat
long, and so the ears are drawn into length also.

     Why did nature give living creatures ears?

     For two causes: 1. Because with them they should
hear. 2. Because that by the ear choleric superfluity is
purged; for as the head is purged of phlegmatic
superfluity by the nose, so from choleric by the ears.


Of the Mouth.

     WHY hath the mouth lips to compass it?

     According to Constant, because the lips do cover and
defend the teeth; it were unseemly that the teeth should
always be seen. Another answer is, that the teeth are of
a cold nature, and would therefore be soon hurt if they
were not covered with lips. An other moral reason is,
because a man should not be too hasty of speech.

     Why hath a man two eyes, two ears, and but one
mouth?

     Because a man should speak but little, and hear and
see much. And withal, Aristotle doth say, that the
hearing in the light doth show us many things; and Seneca
doth agree unto this, affirming that nature environed the
tongue with a double cloister, and teeth, and lips, and
has made the ears open and wide, and has given us but one
mouth to speak but little, though we hear much.

     Why hath a man a mouth?

     For many commodities: 1. Because the mouth is the
gate and door of the stomach. 2. Because the meat is
chewed in the mouth, and prepared and made ready for the
first digestion, although Avicen doth hold that digestion
is made in the mouth. 3. Because that the air drawn unto
the hollow of the mouth for the refreshing of the heart
is made more pure and subtile. And for many other causes,
which shall hereafter appear.

     Why are the lips moveable?

     Because of forming the voice and words, which cannot
be perfectly done without these. For as without a, b, c,
there is no writing, so without the lips no voice can be
well formed.

     Why do men gape?

     This gloss upon the last part of Hippocrates'
Aphorisms saith, that it proceeds of wearisomeness, as
when a man sitteth among such as he doth not know, whose
company he would willingly be rid of. Besides, gaping is
caused of the thick fumes and vapours that fill the jaws,
by the expulsion of which is caused the stretching out
and expansion of the jaws, and opening of the mouth,
which is called gaping.

     Why doth a man gape when be seeth another man gape?

     This proceedeth of imagination. And this is proved
by a similitude: for an ass is animal valde sensible, by
reason of his melancholy, because he doth retain his
superfluity a long time, and would neither eat nor piss,
unless he should hear another piss; and a man gapes
through imagination when another man gapes.


Of the Teeth.

     Why do they only, amongst all other bones, feel the
sense of feeling?

     Because, as Avicen and Galen do say, they might
discern of heat and cold which hurt them, which other
bones need not.

     Why have men more teeth then women?

     By reason of the abundance of heat and blood which
is more in men than in women.

     Why do the teeth grow to the end of our life, and
not the other bones?

     Because otherwise they would be consumed with
chewing and grinding.

     Why do the teeth only come again when they fall, or
be taken out, and other bones taken away grow no more?

     Because that, according to Aristotle, all other
bones are engendered of the humidity which is called
radical, and so they breed in the womb of the mother, but
the teeth are engendered of nutritive humidity, which is
renewed and increased from day to day.

     Why do the fore teeth fall in youth, and grow again,
and not the cheek-teeth?

     This proceedeth of the defect of matter, and of the
figure, because the fore-teeth are sharp, and the others
broad. But, according to Aristotle, there is another
answer: that is, that it is the office of the fore-teeth
to cut the meat, and therefore they are sharp; and the
office of the other to chew the meat, and therefore they
are broad in fashion, which is fittest for that purpose.

     Why do the fore-teeth grow the soonest?

     Because we want them sooner in cutting than the
othrr in chewing.

     Why do teeth grow black in the old age of human
creatures?

     This proceedeth of the corruption of the meat, and
the corruption of phlegm, with a naughty choleric humour.

     Why are colts' teeth yellow, and of the colour of
saffron when they are young, and wax white when they be
old?

     Aristotle saith, that a horse hath abundance of
watery humours in him, which in his youth are digested
and converted into grossness; but in old age heat is
diminished, and the watery humours remain, whose proper
colour is white.

     Why did nature give living creatures teeth?

     Aristotle saith (lib. de generat animal), to some to
fight with, and for defence of their lives, as unto
wolves and bats; unto some to eat with, as unto horses;
unto some for the forming of their voice, as unto men,
"as it appeareth by the commentary in the book de
animal."

     Why do horned beasts want their upper cheek teeth?

     According to Aristotle in his book de animal horns
and teeth are caused of the self-same matter, that is of
nutrimental humidity, and therefore the matter which
passeth into horns turneth not into teeth, consequently
want the upper teeth. And such beasts, according unto
Aristotle, cannot chew well; whereupon for want of teeth
they have two stomachs by consequence, and so do chew
their meat twice; and they do first convey their meat
into the first stomach or belly, and then return it from
whence it came, and chew it.

     Why are some creatures brought forth with teeth as
kids sad lambs, or some without, as men?

     Nature doth not want in things necessary, and abound
in things superfluous; and therefore, because these
beasts not long after they are fallen do need teeth, are
fallen with teeth: but men are nourished with their
mother's dugs for a time, and therefore for a time do not
want teeth.

     Why have not birds teeth?

     Because the matter of teeth passeth into their beak,
and therefore there is their digestion; or else it is
answered that although they do not chew with teeth, yet
their head in digestion doth supply the want of teeth.



Of the Tongue.


     WHY is the tongue full of pores?


     According to Aristotle de animal, because the tongue
is the means whereby we taste; and through the mouth, in
the pores of the tongue, the taste doth come into the
sense of tasting. Otherwise it is answered, that frothy
spittle is sent into the mouth by the tongue from the
lungs moistening the meat, and making it ready for the
first digestion: and therefore the tongue is full of
pores because many have passage through it.

     Why doth the tongue of such as are sick of agues
judge all things bitter?

     Because the stomach of such persons is filled with
choleric humours, and choler is very bitter, as it
appeareth by the gall, and therefore this bitter fume
doth infect their tongue, and so the tongue being full of
these tastes, doth judge them bitter, although the
bitterness be not in the meat but in the tongue.

     Why doth the tongue water when we hear sour and
sharp things named?

     Because the imaginative virtue or power is of
greater force than the power and faculty of tasting; and
when we imagine a taste, we conceive it by the power of
tasting as by a mean, because there is nothing felt by
the taste, but by means of that spittle the tongue doth
water.

     Why doth some stammer and lisp?

     This happeneth from many causes, sometimes through
the moistness of the tongue and brain, as in children,
which cannot speak plainly, nor pronounce many letters.
Sometimes it happeneth by reason of the shrinking of
certain sinews, which are corrupted with phlegm; for such
sinews there be which go to the tongue.

     Why are the tongues of serpents and mad dogs
venomous?

     Because of the malignity of the venomous humour
which doth predominate in them.

     Why is a dog's tongue fit and apt for medicine, and
contrariwise an horse's tongue pestiferous?

     'Tis by reason of some secret property, or else it
may be said the tongue of a dog is full of pores and so
doth draw and take away the viscosity of the wound. Some
say that a dog hath by nature some humour in his tongue,
with the which by licking he doth heal; the contrary is
in a horse.

     Why is spittle white?

     By reason of the continual moving of the tongue
whereof heat is engendered, which doth make white the 
superfluity, which is spittle, as it is seen in the froth
of water.

     Why is spittle unsavoury and without taste?

     If it had a certain determinate taste, then the
tongue would not taste at all, but should only have the
taste of spittle, and so could not receive other tastes.

     Why doth the spittle of one that is fasting heal an
imposthume?

     Because (according to Avicen) it is well digested,
and made subtile.

     Why doth some abound in spittle more than others?

     This doth proceed of a phlegmatic complexion, which
doth predominate in them and therefore the physicians
doth say, that such should take care of a quotidian ague,
which ariseth from the predomination of phlegm: the
contrary in those that spit little, because heat abounds
in them, which consumes the humidity of the spittle; and
so the defect of spittle is a sign of fever.

     Why is the spittle of a man that is fasting more
subtile than one who is full?

     Because that the spittle is without the viscosity of
meat, which is wont to make the spittle of one who is
full gross and thick.

     From whence proceedeth the spittle of man?

     From the froth of the lungs, which, according to the
physicians are the seat of the phlegm.

     Why are such beasts as often go together for
generation very full of froth and foam?

     Because that then the lights and the heart are in a
great motion of lust, therefore there is engendered in
them much frothy matter.

     Why have not birds spittle?

     Because they have dry lungs, according to Aristotle
in the fifth book de Animal.

     Why do such as are called Epileprici, that is, such
as are overwhelmed, and as it were drowned in their own
blood, and are diseased, savour badly and corruptly?

     The answer, according to the physician, is, because
the pecant matter lieth in the head; but if he do vomit,
then the matter is in the stomach; but if he piss much,
then the matter is in the passage of the urine; but if
they begin to have seed, then it is in the vessels of the
seed, and according to this physicians do purge them.

     Why doth the tongue lose sometimes the use of
speaking?

     The answer is out of Hippocrates, That this doth
happen through a palsy or apoplexy, that is a sudden
effusion of blood, and of a gross humour, and sometimes 
also by infection of spiritus animalis in the middle cell
of the brain, which hinders the spirits from being
carried to the tongue; and so is Galen's meaning, for by
the expression of the tongue many actions of divers
passions are made manifest.



Of the Roof of the Mouth.


     Why are the fruits before they be ripe, of a naughty
relish, or bitter, and after sweet?

     A naughty relish in taste proceedeth of coldness,
and want of heat in gross and thick humidity, but a sweet
taste proceedeth of sufficient heat, and therefore in the
ripe fruit the humidity is subtile through the heat of
the sun, and such fruits are commonly sweet; but before
they be ripe, as humidity is gross or subtile for want of
heat the fruit is bitter and sour.

     Why are we better delighted with sweet tastes than
with bitter or any other?

     Because nature is delighted with sweetness; the
reason is, because a sweet thing is hot and moist, and
though his heart doth dissolve and consume superfluous
humidities, and by this humidity immundicity is wiped
away, but a sharp eager taste, by reason of the cold
which predominates in it, doth bind over much, and prick
and offend the parts of the body in purging, and
therefore we do not delight in that taste, because the
physicians counsel us to eat nothing that is bitter in
the summer nor in a great heat; and the reason is,
because bitterness doth breed heat, but we shall eat
bitter things in winter only; and therefore Aristotle
doth say, that sweet things are grateful unto nature and
do greatly nourish.

     Why doth a sharp taste, as of vinegar, provoke
appetite rather than any other?

     Because it is cold, and doth cool. Now it is the
nature of cold to desire and draw, and therefore is cause
of appetite. Mark, that then are nine kinds of tastes:
three of which proceed from heat, three from cold, and
three from a temperate mean.

     Why do we draw in more air than we breathe out?

     Aristotle and Albertus in their book de motu cordis,
do answer, that much air is drawn in, and so converted
into nutriment, which, together with the vital spirits,
is contained in the lungs. Wherefore a beast is not
suffocated so long as he receives air with the lungs, in
which some part of the air remaineth also.

     Why doth the air seem to be expelled and put forth,
seeing that indeed the air is invisible, by reason of its
variety and thinness?

     Because the air which is received in us is mingled
with th. vapours and fumosity of the heart, by reason 
whereof it is made thick, and so is seen. And this is
proved by experience, because that in winter we see our
breath, for the coldness of air doth bind the breath
mixed with fumosities, and so it is thickened and made
gross, and by consequence is seen.

     Why have some men a stinking breath?

     The answer is, according to the physicians, because
there rise evil fumes from the stomach, and sometimes it
doth proceed from the corruption of the airy parts of the
body, as of the lungs. And the breath of lepers is so
infected that it doth poison the birds that are near
them, because the inward parts are very corrupt, as
appears by Const. de fin. Now the leprosy is a
nourishment of all the parts of the body, together with a
corrupting of them and it doth begin in the blood, and
exterior members of the body.

     Why are lepers hoarse?

     Because that in them the vocal instruments are
corrupted, that is the lights.

     Why do men become hoarse?

     Because of the rheum descending from the brain
filling the conduits of the lights; or sometimes through
some imposthumes of the throat, or rheum gathering in the
neck.

     Why have females of all living creatures the
shrillest voice, a crow only excepted, and a woman
shriller than a man, and a smaller?

     According to Aristotle, by reason of the composition
of the veins the vocal arteries of voice is formed, as
appears by a similitude, because a small pipe sounds
shriller than a great. And also in women, because the
passage where the voice is formed is made narrow and
straight, by reason of cold, it being the nature of cold
to bind; but in men the passage is open and wider through
heat, bemuse it is the property of heat to open and
dissolve. It proceedeth in women through the moistness of
the lungs and weakness of the heat. Young men and
diseased have sharp and shrill voices for the same cause.
And this is the natural cause why a man child at his
birth doth cry a. i., which is a slender sound, and
pleaseth Libertinus, when he saith Masculas a prosert.

     Why doth the voice change in men and women; in men
at fourteen, in women at twelve; in men when they begin
to yield seed; in women when their breasts begin to grow,
as Aristotle says, Lib. de animal?

     Because then, saith Aristotle, the beginning of the
voice is slackened and loosened; and he proves this by a
similitude of a string of an instrument let down or
loosed, which gives a great sound. He proves it another
way, because creatures which are gelded, as eunuchs,
capons, etc., have softer and slenderer voices than
others, by reason they want stones.

     Why is not a wolf hoarse when a man looks on him?

     Because a man is not so cold as a wolf, nor of so
malignant a quality.

     Why doth a man which is slain bleed when he is seen
of him who killed him?

     This proceedeth of divine cause, and not of a
natural, because his blood calleth for vengeance against
the murderer; but if there be any natural cause for it,
it is this: the committer of this wicked act calling it
to mind, is very sorry for it, and repents him of it; is
in anguish of mind, and in a great heat through the
imagination he hath conceived and by that means all his
spirits do stir and boil, and repair into the instruments
of the sight of the eyes, unto the wounds which are made,
which if they be fresh, do presently fail a bleeding.
Besides this is done fry the help of the air then
breathed in, which, being drawn from the wound, causeth
it to bleed.

     Why do small birds sing more and louder than great
ones, as appears in the lark and nightingale?

     Because the spirits of small birds are subtile and
soft, and the organ conduit straight, as appeareth in a
pipe, and therefore follow easily any desire, and so do
sing very soft.

     Why doth the male sing more than the female, as
appeareth in all living creatures?

     It proceedeth from the desire of carnal copulation,
because that then the spirits are moved throughout all
the body with the aforesaid appetite and desires. And
generally speaking, the females are colder than the
males.

     Why do bees, wasps, flies, locusts, and many other
such like insects, make a noise, seeing they have no
lungs, nor instruments of the voice?

     According to Aristotle there is in them a certain
small skin which, when the air doth strike it, causeth
the sound, and there is a strange sound.

     Why do not fish make a sound?

     Because, according to Aristotle, they have no lungs,
but only gills, nor yet a heart; and therefore they need 
not the drawing in of the air, and by consequence they
make no noise, because that (according to Aristotle) a
voice is a percussion of the air which is drawn.


Of the Neck.

     Why hath a living creature a neck?

     Because the neck is the supporter of the head, as
Aristotle teacheth; and therefore the neck is the middle
between the head and the body, to the intent that by it,
and by its sinews, as by certain means and ways, motion
and sense of the body might be conveyed throughout all
the body; and that by means of the neck, as it were by a
distance, the heart, which is very hot, might be
separated from the brain.

     Why do some beasts want necks, as Serpents and
fishes?

     Because such beasts want a heart, and therefore they
want that distance which we have spoken of; or else we
answer, they have a neck in some inward part of them, but
it is not distinguished outwardly from the heart to the
head.

     Why is the neck full of bones and joints?

     Because it may bear and sustain the head the
stronger; also because the backbone is joined to the
brain in the neck, and from thence it receives marrow,
which is of the substance of the brain.

     Why have some beasts long necks, as cranes, storks,
and such like?

     Because such beasts do seek their living in the
bottom of the water, and therefore have such necks; and
some beasts have  short necks; as sparrows, hawks, etc.,
because such are ravenous beasts, and therefore for
strength have short necks; as appeareth in the ox, which
has a short neck, and therefore strong.

     Why is thee neck hollow, and especially before about
the tongue?

     Because there are two passages, whereof the one doth
carry the meat into the nutritive instrument, as to the
stomach and liver, and is called of the Greeks,
Oesophagus; and the other is the windpipe.

     Why is the artery made with rings and circles?

     The better to bow and give a good sounding again.

     Why doth a chicken move a good space after his head
is cut off, and a man beheaded never stirreth?

     Because chickens and such like have straight sinews
and arteries, and therefore the spirit of moving
continueth long after the head is off; but men and many
beasts have long and large sinews and arteries, and
therefore the moving spirits do quickly depart from them,
and so by consequence cannot move their bodies.


Of the Shoulders and Arms.

     Why hath a man shoulders and arms?
To give and carry burdens, according to Aristotle.

     Why are his arms round?

     For the swifter and speedier work, because that
figure is fittest to move.

     Why are his arms thick?

     Because they should be strong to lift and bear
burdens, or thrust and give a strong blow: so their bones
are thick, because they contain much marrow, for they
would be easily corrupted and marred; but marrow cannot
so well be contained in small bones
as in great.

     Why do such as are diseased and in grief uncover and
cover their arms, and such also as are in agony?

     Because such are near unto death; and it is a sign
of death by reason of great grief which causeth that
uncovering, as Hippocrates doth teach, lib. Prognost.

     Why do the arms become small and slender in some
sickness, as in madmen, and such as are sick of the
dropsy?

     Because all the parts of the body do suffer the one
with the other, and therefore one member being in grief,
all the humours do concur and run thither to give succour
and help to the aforesaid grief. For when the head doth
ache, all humours of the arms doth run into the head, and
therefore the arms become small and slender, because they
want their proper nourishment.

     Why have brute beasts no arms?

     Their fore-feet are instead of arms, and in their
place; or else we may answer more fitly, because all
beasts have some part for their defence and to fight
with, as the wolf his feet, the cow her horns, the horse
his hinder feet, birds their beak and wings, but only man
hath his arms.


Of the Hands.

     For what use hath a man hands, and an ape also with 
is like unto a man?

     The hand is an instrument which a man doth
especially make use of, because many things are done by
the hands, and not by any other part, as Aristotle doth
teach.

     Why are some men ambo dexter -- that is, use the
left hand as the right?

     By reason of the great heat of the heart, and for
the hot bowing of the same, for it is that which makes a
man as nimble of the left hand as of the right; and
without doubt are of good complexions.


     Why are not women ambo dexter as well as men? Hid.
ult. Aphorism.

     Because, as Galen saith, a woman in health, that is
most hot, is colder than the coldest man in health; I say
in health, for if she hath an ague she is accidentally
hotter than a man.

     Why are the fingers full of joints?

     To be more fit and apt to receive, and keep the
things received.

     Why hath every finger three joints, and the thumb
but two?

     The thumb hath three, but the third is joined unto
the arm, therefore is stronger than the other finger; and
is called pollox a polleo, that is, to excel in strength.

     Why are the fingers of the right hand nimbler than
the fingers of the left, as Aegidius saith?

     It proceedeth from the heat which doth predominate
in those parts, which causeth great agility.

     Why are the fingers thicker before meat than after,
as Albertus saith?

     According to the physicians, because a man which is
fasting is full of bad humours and divers fumosities,
which puff up the parts of the body, and the fingers
also; but when those humours are expelled through meat,
the fingers become more slender. And for the same reason,
a man which is fasting is heavier than when he hath meat
in his belly, as is most plain in fasters. Another reason
may be given, that is, because that after meat the heat
is deprived from the outward parts of the body into the
inward, to help digestion, and the outward and external
parts become slender; but after the digestion is made,
the blood turneth again to exterior parts, and then they 
become great again.

     Why are some men left handed?

     Because the heart sendeth out heat into the right
side but more into the left and doth also work a
slenderness and subtility on the left side.


Of the Nails.

     From whence do nails proceed?

     Of the fumosity and humours, which are resolved and
go into the extremities of the fingers, and they are
dried through the power of the external air, and brought
to the hardness of a horn.

     Why do the nails of old men grow black and pale?

     Because the heat of the heart decayeth, which
decaying, their beauty decayeth also.

     Why are men judged to be good or evil complexioned
by the colour of their nails?

     Because they give witness of the goodness or badness
of the heart, and therefore of the complexion; for if
they be somewhat red, they betoken choler well tempered;
but if they be yellowish or black they signify
melancholy.

     Why do white spots appear in the nails?

     Through mixture of phlegm with the nutriment.


Of the Breast.

     For what reason is the breast hollow?

     Because there is the seat of the spiritual and
aerial members, which are most noble, as the heart and
lights; and therefore, because these might be kept from
hurt, it was necessary that the breast should be hollow.

     Why hath a man the broadest breast of all living
creatures?

     Because the spirits of men are weak and subtile, and
therefore do require a spacious place wherein they are
contained, as the breast is.

     Why are breasts of beasts round?

     Because they be in continual motion, and that figure
is under the breast; and therefore that which the heart
doth love we draw to the breast, by reason of the
neighbourhood it has with the heart, so applying the
thing loved unto the lover.

     Why have women narrower breasts than men?

     Because there is more heat in men, which doth
naturally move to the uppermost part of them, making
those parts great and large; and therefore a great breast
is a token of courage, as Aristotle saith, declaring this
to be true by the lion and bull; but in women cold
predominates, which naturally tends downwards, and
therefore, saith Aristotle, women often fall on their
tail, because their hinder parts are gross and heavy, by
reason of cold ascending thither; but a man commonly
falls on his breast, by reason of his greatness and
thickness.


Of the Paps and Dugs.

     Why are paps placed upon the breasts?

     Because the breast is the seat of the heart, which
is most hot, and therefore the paps grow there, to the
end that the menses being conveyed thither, as being near
to the heat of the hearts
should the sooner be digested, and perfected, and
converted into the matter and substances of milk.

     Why are the paps below the breasts in beasts, and
above the breasts in women?

     Because a woman goes upright, and has two legs only;
and therefore, if her paps should be below her breasts
they would hinder her going; but beasts have four feet,
and therefore they are not hindered in their going.

     Why have not men as great paps and breasts as women?

     Because a man hath no monthly terms, and therefore
hath no vessel deputed for them. And yet Aristotle saith,
that men have small paps, and women have little small
stones.

     Which paps are best for children to suck, great ones
or little ones, or the mean between both?

     In great ones the heat is dispersed and there is no
good digestion of milk; but in small ones the power and
force is strong, because a virtue united is strongest,
and by consequence there is good working and digestion of
the milk, and therefore the small are better than the
great ones; but yet the mean ones are best of all,
because every mean is best.

     Why do the paps of young women begin to grow about
13 or 15 years of age, as Albertus saith?

     Because then the flowers have no course to the
teats, by which the young one is nourished, but follow
their ordinary course, and therefore wax soft.

     Why hath a woman, which is with child of a boy, the
right pap harder than the left?

     Because the male child is conceived in the right
side of the mother, as Hippocrates saith, and therefore
the flowers do run to the right pap and make it hard.

     Why doth it show weakness of the child when the milk
doth drop out of the paps before the woman be delivered?

     According to Aristotle, because the milk is the
proper nourishment of the child in the womb of the
mother; and, therefore, if the milk run out, it is a
token that the child is not nourished, and therefore is
weak.

     Why doth the hardness of the paps betoken the health
of the child in the womb?

     Because the flowers are converted into milk, and
that milk doth sufficiently nourish the child, and
thereby the strength is signified.

     Why hath a woman but two paps, and some brute beasts
ten or more?

     Because for the most part a woman hath but one
child, either boy or girl, and therefore one pap is
sufficient, or two; but beasts have many young ones, and
therefore so many teats.

     But why are women's paps hard where they be with
child, and not at other times?

     They swell then, and are puffed up, because the
great moisture which proceeds from the flowers doth run
into the paps, which at other seasons remaineth in the
matrix or womb, and it is expelled by the place deputed
for that end.

     By what means doth the milk of the paps come to the
matrix or womb?

     According to Hippocrates, because there is a certain
knitting and coupling of the pap with the womb, and there
are certain veins which the midwives do cut in the time
of the birth of the child, and by those veins the milk do
flow in at the navel of the child, and so it receives
nutriment by the navel. Some say the child in the womb is
nourished at the mouth but it is false, because that so
he should void excrements also; but that is false,
because if is not seen where.

     Why is it as sign of a male child in the womb when
the milk that runneth out of the woman's breasts is thick
and not much, and of a female when it is thin?

     Because a woman that goeth with a boy hath great
heat in her, which doth perfect the milk and make it
thicker; but such as go with a girl hath not so much
heat, and therefore the milk is undigested, and
unperfected, and watery, and thin, and will swim above
the water if it be put into it.

     Why is the milk white, seeing the flowers are red
which it is engendered of?

     Because blood which is well purged and concocted
becometh white, as appeareth in flesh, whose proper
colour is red, and being boiled is white. Another answer
is, because every humour which is engendered of such part
of the body is made like unto that part in colour where
it is engendered as near as it can be; but because the
flesh of the paps is white therefore the colour of  the
milk is white.

     Why doth a cow give milk more abundantly than other
beasts?

     Because she is a great eating beast; and where is
much monthly superfluity engendered there is much milk,
because it is nothing else but that blood purged and
tried; and because a cow has much of this monthly blood,
she has much milk.

     Why is not milk wholesome, Hippocrates saith, Par.
2, Aphor?
According to the opinion of Galen, for divers reasons:
First, because it doth curdle in the stomach, whereof an
evil breath is bred. But to this Hippocrates gives this
remedy; saying if the third part of it be mingled with
running water, then it is not hurtful. Another reason is,
because the milk doth grow sour in the stomach where evil
humours are bred, which infect the breath.

     Why is milk bad for such as have the headache?

     Because it is easily turned into great fumosities,
and hath much terrestrial substance in it, the which
ascending doth cause the headache.

     Why is milk fit nutriment for infants?

     Because it is a natural and useful food, and they
were nourished by the same in the womb.

     For what reason are the white meats made of a new
milked cow good?

     Because milk at that time is very spungy, expel many
fumosities, and doth as it were purge at that time.

     Why is the milk naught for the child if the woman
uses carnal copulation?

     Because in time of carnal copulation the best part
of the milk goes to the seed vessels, and to the womb,
and the worst remains in the paps, which doth hurt to the
child.

     Why is the milk of brown women better than that of
white?

     Because brown women are hotter than others, and heat
purges the milk, and so it is better.

     Why do physicians forbid the eating of fish and milk
at the same time?

     Because they produce a leprosy, and because they are
both phlegmatic.

     Why have not birds and fish milk and paps?

     Because paps would hinder the flight of birds: the
fish also have neither paps nor milk, as Aristotle saith,
but the females cast much spawn, on which the male
touches with a small gut, which causes their kind to be
infinite in succession.


of the Back.

     Why have beasts backs?

     According to Aristotle, for three causes; first,
because the back should be the way and mien of body from
which are extended and spread throughout all the sinews
of the back-bone, as it appears in such as are hanged;
because when they are in pieces, or without flesh, the
sinews hang whole in the chine or backbone. The second,
because it should be a guard and a defence for the soft
parts of the body, as of the stomach, liver, lights, and
such like. The third, because it should be the foundation
of all the bones, because we see other bones, as the
ribs, fastened to the back-bone,

     Why hath man above all other creatures a broad back
which he can lie upon, which no beast can do?

     because a broad back doth answer a broad breast; if
therefore a man should have a sharp back like unto a
beast, that would be of an unseemly shape; and therefore
it is requisite that he should have a broad back.

     Why hath a man that lieth on his back horrible
visions?

     Because the passage or sign of the fantasy is open,
which is in the fore part of the brain, and so the
fantasy is destroyed, and then those visions followeth.
Another reason is, because when a man lieth on his back,
the humours are distributed and moved upward where the
fantasy is, which by that means is distributed.

     Why is it naught to lie on the back?

     Because as the physicians say, it disposes a man to
leprosy, madness, and to an incubus, where you may note
that mania, or madness, is the hurt or disturbance of the
forepart of the brain, which is taken away, or
depravation of the imagination; but incubus (i.e., the
nightmare) is a passion of the heart, wherein a man
thinks himself to be strangled in his sleep, and
something lies heavy on his stomach, which he would put
off.

     Why hath the back-bone so many joints or knots,
called spondelia by the physicians?

     For the moving and bending it, without which joints
that could not be done; and therefore they say amiss that
elephant hath no such joints, for without them they could
not move.

     Why do fish die after their back-bone is burst?

     Because in fish the back-bone is instead of the
heart. Now the heart is the first thing that lives and
the last that dies, and therefore when the bone is broke
fish can no longer live.

     Why does a man die soon after the marrow is hurt or
perished?

     Because the marrow proceeds from the brain, which is
a principal part of a man; as appears, first, because the
marrow is white like the brain; and secondly, because it
hath a thick skin or rind, which that called nucha has
not, which differs from the marrow, because two coverings
like the brain, called pia mater and dura mater.

     Why have some men the piles?

     Those men are cold and melancholy, which melancholy
first passes to the spleen, its proper seat; but there
cannot be retained for abundance of blood; for which
reason it is conveyed to the back-bone, where there are
certain veins which terminate in the back, and receive
the blood. When those veins are full of the melancholy
blood, then the conduits of nature are opened, and the
blood issues out once a month, like women's terms. Those
men who have this course of blood are kept from many
infirmities, as dropsy, plague, etc.

     Why are the Jews much subject to this disease?

     Divines say, because they cried at the death of
Christ, Let His blood fall upon us and our children:
Therefore it is said in the Psalms, "Percussit tot Deus
posteria doci." Another reason is, because the Jews eat
much phlegmatic and cold meats, which breed melancholy
blood, but it is purged with this flux: A third reason is
motion causes heat, and heat digestion; but strict Jews
neither move, labour, nor converse with men; besides,
they are in continual fear we should revenge the death of
our Saviour, which likewise breeds a coldness in them,
and hinders digestion, causing melancholy blood, which is
by this means purged out.


Of the Heart.

     Why are the heart and dugs called lively parts of
the body, in Latin, Spirituala membrana?

     From the word Spiritus, which signifies breath,
life, or soul; and because the vital spirits are
engendered in the brain. Yet that is no good answer, for
the liver and brain might be so called, because the liver
giveth nutriment, and the brain sense and life; the
consequence is clear, for the vital spirits are
engendered in the liver, and the sensible and animal
spirits in the brain.

     Why are the lungs light, spungy, and full of holes?

     That the air may the better be received in them for
cooling the heart, and expelling humours, because the
lungs are the fan of the heart; and as a pair of bellows
is railed up by taking in the air, and shrink by blowing
it out, so likewise the lungs draw the air to cool the
heart and cast it out, lest through too much heat of the
air drawn in the heart should be suffocated.

     Why is the flesh of the lungs white?

     Because they are in continual motion.

     Why have those beasts only lungs that have hearts?

     Because the lungs be no part for themselves, but for
the heart; and therefore it were superfluous for those
creatures to have lungs that have no hearts; but nature
is never wanting in things necessary, nor abounds in
superfluities.

     Why do such creatures as have no lungs want a
bladder?

     Because such drink no water to make their meat
digest, but only for the tempering their food, and
therefore they want a bladder and urine: as appears in
such birds as do not drink at all, viz., the falcon and
sparrow-hawk.

     Why is the heart in the midst of the body?

     Because it should impart life to all parts of the
body, and therefore it is compared to the sun, which is
placed in the midst of the planets, to pour light into
them all; therefore the Pythagoreans styling the heavens
a great living creature, say the sun is the heat thereof.

     Why only in men is the heart on the left side?

     To the end the heat of the heart should mitigate the
coldness of the spleen, for the spleen is the seat of
melancholy, which is on the left side also.

     Why is the heart first engendered; for according to
Aristotle, the heart doth first live, and die last?

     Because, as Aristotle saith, de juvent. and fenect.,
the heart is the beginning and original of life, and
without it no part can live. According to the
philosopher, of the seed retained in the matrix there is
first engendered a little small skin, which compasses the
seed wherefore first the heart is made of the purest
blood; then of blood not so pure, the liver; and of thick
and cold blood, the marrow and brain.

     Why are beasts bold that have little hearts?

     Because in a little heart the heart is well united
and vehement, and the blood touching it, doth quickly
heat it, and is speedily carried to other parts of the
body, which gives courage and boldness.

     Why are creatures with a large heart timorous, as
the hare?

     The heart is dispersed in such a one, and not able
to heat the blood which cometh to it, and so fear is
bred.

     How comes it that the heart is continually moving?

     According to Aristotle de motu cordis, and Galen, it
is because in it there is a certain spirit which is more
subtile than air, which by reason of its thickness and
rarefaction marks a larger space, filling the hollow room
of the heart, whereof the dilating and opening of the
heart doth follow; and because the heart is earthly the
thrusting and moving ceasing, its parts are at rest,
tending downwards. Galen giveth an experiment of an
acorn, which, if put into the fire, the heat dissolves
its humidity, therefore doth occupy a greater space, so
that the rind cannot contain it, but puffs it up and
throws it into the fire. The like of the heart; therefore
note, that the heart of a living creature is triangular
in a manner, having its least part towards the left side,
and the greater towards the right, and doth also open and
shut in the least part, by which means it is a continual
motion; the first motion is by the physicians called
Diastole, that is, extending the breast or heart; the
other Systole, i.e., shutting of the heart; and from
these two all the motions of the body proceed, and that
of the pulse which physicians feel.

     Why are great beasts lean?

     The natural heat proceeding from the heart consumes
that natural humidity which should be converted into fat.
And for the most part women are hotter than men, because
they have much humidity in them, and a moister heart than
men.

     How comes it that the flesh of the heart is so
compact and knit together?

     It is because in thick compacted substances heat is
strongly received and united, as appears in other things;
And because the heart with its heat should moderate the
coldness of the brain, it is made of that fat flesh apt
to keep a strong heat.

     How comes the heart to be the hottest part of all
living creatures?

     It is so compacted as to receive heat best and
because it should mitigate the coldness of the brain.

     Why is the heart the beginning of life?

     It is plain in it the vital spirit is bred, which is
the heat of life; and therefore according to the opinion
of August, de different. spirit. et anima, the heart hath
two receptacles, i.e., the right and the left; the right
hath more blood than spirits, which spirit is engendered,
to give life and vivify the body.

     Why is the heart long and sharp like a pyramid?

     The round figure hath no angles, therefore the heart
is round, for fear any poison or hurtful matter should be
retained in it and as Aristotle affirms, because that
figure is fittest for motion.

     How comes the blood chiefly to be in the heart?

     The blood is in the heart as in its proper or
efficient place, which some attribute to the liver; and
therefore the heart doth not receive blood of any other
parts, but no other parts of it.

     How happens it that some creatures want a heart?

     Although they have no heart, yet they have somewhat
that answers it, as appears in eels, and fish which have
the back-bone instead of a heart.

     Why does the heart beat in some creatures when the
head is off, as appears in birds and hens?

     Because the heart is what lives first and dies last,
and therefore beats more than other parts.

     Why doth the heat of the heart sometimes fall of a
sudden, as in those who have the falling sickness?

     This proceeds, according to Constant, from a defect
of the heart itself, and of certain small skins with
which it is covered, the which being infected and
corrupted the heart falleth of a sudden; and sometimes it
happen by reason of the parts adjoining, and therefore,
when any venomous humour goes out of the stomach, that
hurts the heart and parts adjoining, that causes this
fainting; the disposition of the heart is known by the
pulse, because a swift beating pulse shows the heat of
the heart, and a slow beating one denotes coldness.
Therefore a woman that is in health has a slower and
weaker pulse than a man, as shall appear hereafter.


Of the Stomach.

     For what reason is the stomach large and wide?

     Because in it the food is first concocted or
digested as it were in a pot, to the end what is pure
should be separated from them which is not, as Aristotle
saith; and therefore, according to the quantity of food
the stomach is enlarged.

     How comes it that the stomach is round?

     Because if it had angles and corners, as Constant
says, food would remain in them and breed ill humours, so
a man would sever want agues; which humours nevertheless
are evacuated, lifted up, and consumed, and not hid in
any such corners, by reason of the roundness of the
stomach.

     How comes the stomach to be full of sinews?

     As Aristotle saith, because the sinews can be
extended and enlarged, and so is the stomach when it is
full; but when empty, it is drawn together, and therefore
nature provides those sinews.

     How comes the stomach to digest?

     Because of the heat which is in it, and comes from
the parts adjoining, i.e., the liver and the heart. For
we see in metals, the heat of the fire takes away the
rust and dross from iron and silver from tin, and gold
from copper; so that by digestion the pure is separated
from the impure. Digestion is of four sorts, according to
physicians.

     For what reason doth the stomach join the liver?

     Because the liver is very hot, and with its heat
helps digestion, and provokes appetite.

     Why are we commonly cold after dinner?

     Because then the heart labours to help the
imagination in study. It comes from digesting the food,
and that remains undigested; so that people should walk
some time after meals.

     How comes women with child to have an inordinate
desire of eating coals, ashes, and such like?

     Because such are the humours of the stomach, such a
nutriment they desire; and because women with child have
corrupt humour. therefore they desire the like thing.

     How cometh the stomach slowly to digest meat?

     Because it swims in the stomach. Now the best
digestion is in the bottom of the stomach, the fat
descends not there; such as eat fat meat are very sleepy,
by reason digestion is hindered.

     Why is all the body worse when the stomach is
uneasy?

     Because the stomach is knit with the brain, heart,
and liver, which are the principal parts in man; and
therefore when it is not well, the others are evil
disposed. Another answer is, that if the first digestion
be hindered, the others are also hindered; for in the
first digestion is the beginning of the infirmity that is
in the stomach.

     Why are young men sooner hungry than old men?

     Young men do digest for three causes, first for
growing, then for the restoring of life, and lastly for
conservation of life, as Hippocrates and Galen do say;
else we answer, that young men are hot and dry, and
therefore the heat doth digest more, and by consequence
they desire more.

     Why do physicians prescribe that men should eat when
they have an appetite?

     Because much hunger and emptiness will fill the
stomach with naughty rotten humour, which he draws into
himself instead of meat; which do easily appear, because
that if we fast overnight we have an appetite to meat,
but in the morning none. That is therefore a token that
the stomach is filled with naughty humours, and
especially its mouth, which is no trim filling, but a
deceitful one. And therefore, after we have eaten little
our stomach comes to us again; and then the proverb is,
one morsel draweth down another: for the first morsel
having made clean the mouth of the stomach, doth provoke
the appetite.

     Why do physicians prescribe that we should not eat
too much at a time, but by little and little?

     Because when the stomach is full, the meat doth swim
in it, which is a dangerous thing. Another reason is,
that as very green wood doth put out a fire, so much meat
chokes the natural heat and puts it out: and therefore 
the best physic is to use temperance in eating and
drinking.

     Why do we desire change of meats according to the
change of times; as in winter, beef, pork, mutton; in
summer, light meats, as veal, lamb, etc.?

     Because the complexion of the body is altered, and
changes according to the time of the year. Another answer
is, that this proceeds from the quality of the season,
because the cold winter doth cause a better digestion,
because the stomach and belly is hotter in winter by
reason of the compassing cold, as Hippocrates and
Aristotle doth teach.

     Why the meat we eat should not be as hot as pepper
and ginger?

     Because hot meat doth burn the blood and dispose it
to leprosy. So contrariwise, meat too cold doth mortify
and congeal the blood. And our meat should not be over
sharp, because it procureth old age, and too much sauce
doth burn the entrails, and procureth often drinking, as
raw meat doth; and over-sweet meats do constipate and
cling the veins together.

     Why is it good custom to eat cheese after dinner,
and pears after all meat?

     Because cheese, by reason of its earthliness and
thickness, tendeth down towards the bottom of the
stomach, and so putteth down the meat, and the like of
pears. Note, that new cheese is better than old, and the
old dry, soft cheese is very naughty and procureth the
headache and stopping of the liver; and the older the
worser. Whereupon it is said, that the cheese is naught,
and digesteth all things but itself.

     Why be nuts good after fish? and the verse is:
After fish nuts; after flesh cheese.?

     Because fish is of a hard digestion, and doth easily
putrefy and corrupt; and nuts help digestion because they
be somewhat hot; fish. is poisoned sometimes, and nuts
are a remedy against a poison. And note, they should be
of a clear stony water, and not of a cold standing, muddy
water, and should be so in wine and parsley, and so it
hurteth least.

     Why is it unwholesome to stay long for one dish
after another and to eat of divers kinds of meat?

     Because the first begins to digest when the first is
eaten and so the digestion is not equally made, and
therefore the meat digested beginneth to corrupt. But yet
this rule is to be noted touching the order of meat, that
if there be any dishes, whereof some are light of
digestion, as chickens, kid, veal, soft eggs, and such
like, these meats should be first eaten; but gross meats,
as venison, bacon, beef, roast pork, hard eggs, and fried
eggs, should be eaten last. And the reason is, because
that if they should be first served and eaten, and were
digested, they should hinder the digestion of others; and
the light meats not digested should be corrupted in the
stomach, and kept in the stomach violently, whereof would
follow belching, loathing, headache, bellyache and great
thirst. And by consequence it is very hurtful too at the
same meal to drink milk and wine, because they dispose a
man to leprosy.

     Which is best for the stomach, meat or drink?

     Drink is sooner digested than meat, because meat is
of greater substance, and more material than drink, and
therefore meat is harder to digest.

     Why is it good to drink after dinner?

     Because the drink should make the meat readier to
digest. For if a pot be filled with fish or flesh without
liquor, then both the pot and the meat is marred. The
stomach is like unto a pot which doth boil meat, and
therefore physicians do counsel to drink at meals.

     Why is it good to forbear a late supper?

     Because there is no moving or stirring after supper,
and so the meat is not sent down to the bottom of the
stomach, but remaineth undigested and so breeds hurt; and
therefore a light and short supper is best, as the old
verse doth show.

     How comes some men to evacuate clear meat?

     By reason of the weakness of nature and expulsion;
which disease is called leinteria.


Of the Blood.

     Why is it necessary that every living thing that has
blood have also a liver?

     According to Aristotle, because the blood is first
made in the liver its seat, and is drawn from the stomach
by certain principal veins, and so engendered.

     For what reason is the blood red?

     First, it is like the part in which it is made,
i.e., the liver, which is red, then it is likewise sweet,
because it is well digested and concocted: but if it have
little earthy matter mixed with it, that makes it
somewhat salt, as appears in Aristotle lib. meteor.

     How comes women's blood to be thicker than men's?

     Their coldness thickens, binds, congeals, and joins
it together.

     How comes the blood to all parts of the body through
the liver, and by what means?

     Through the principal veins, as the veins of the
head, liver, etc., to nourish all the body.


Of the Urine.

     How doth the urine come into the bladder, seeing the
bladder is shut?

     Some say by sweating, and it seems to be true.
Others say it comes by a small skin n the bladder, which
opens and lets in the urine, Pheephylack says urine is a
certain and not deceitful messenger of the health or
infirmity of man. Hippocrates says, that men make white
urine in the morning, and before dinner red, but after
dinner pale, and likewise after supper; for there is
divers colours.

     How doth the leprosy proceed from the liver?

     Because it doth greatly engender the brains, and
breed the falling sickness and apoplexy.

     Why is it hurtful to drink much cold water?

     Because one contrary doth hinder and expel another;
for water is very cold, and lying so in the stomach
hinders digestion.

     Why is it unwholesome to drink new wine, and why
doth it very much hurt the stomach?

     One reason is, it cannot be digested, therefore it
causes the belly to swell and in some sort the bloody
flux; secondly, it hinders making water; but to drink
good wine is wholesome.

     Why do physicians forbid us to labour presently
after dinner?

     For three reasons; first, because motion hinders the
virtue and power of digestion; secondly, because stirring
immediately after dinner causes the parts of the both to
draw the meat raw to them, which often breeds sickness;
and thirdly, because motion makes the food descend before
it is digested: but after supper it is good to stir, by
reason we soon after incline to sleep, therefore should
walk a little, that the food may go to the bottom of the
stomach.

     Why is it good to walk before dinner?

     It makes a man well disposed, fortifies and
strengthens the natural heat, causing the superfluity in
the stomach to descend; wherefore Avicen says, such as
neglect this exercise fall into inflammation of the
heart.

     Why is it wholesome to vomit, as some say?

     Because it purges the stomach of all naughty
humours, expelling them, which would breed agues if they
should remain in it. Avicen says, a vomit purges the eyes
and head, clearing the brain.

     How comes sleep to strengthen the stomach and the
digestive faculty?

     Because in sleep the heart draws inward and helps
digestion; but when we wake the heat remains and is
dispersed throughout the body.


Of the Gall and Spleen.

     How came living creatures to have a gall?

     Because choleric humours are received into it, which
through their acidity help the guts to expel
superfluities, also it helps digestion.

     How comes the jaundice to proceed from the gall?

     The humour of the gall is bluish and yellow,
therefore when its pores are stopped the humours cannot
go into the sack thereof,
but is mingled with the blood, wandering throughout all
the body, and infecting the skin.

     Why hath not a horse, mule, ass, or cow a gall?

     Though those creatures have no gall in one pace, as
in purse or vessel, yet they have one dispersed in small
veins.

     How comes the spleen to be black?

     It is occasioned by a terrestrial and earthy matter
of a black colour, as Aristotle says. Another reason is,
according to physicians, the spleen is the receptacle of
melancholy, and that is black.

     Why is he lean who hath a large spleen?

     Because the spleen draws much water to itself, which
would turn to fat; therefore contrariwise men that have
but a small spleen are fat.

     Why does the spleen cause men to laugh, as says
Isadorus, we laugh with the spleen, we be angry with the
caul, we are wise with the heart, love with the liver, we
feel with the brain, and speak with the lungs; that is
the cause of laughing, anger, love, wisdom, speech; and
feeling proceeds from the spleen, gall, liver, lungs and
brain?

     The reason is, the spleen draws much melancholy to
it, being its proper seat, the which melancholy proceeds
from sadness, and is there consumed, and the cause
failing, the effect cloth so likewise. And by the same
reason the gall causes anger; for choleric men are often
angry, because they have much gall. For the better
understanding of this, note, that there are four humours
in man, viz., blood, choler, phlegm, and melancholy; each
has its particular receptacle. Of a hot and dry substance
choler is engendered, which goes to the gall; but of a
cold and dry humour melancholy is engendered, and goes to
the spleen; of a cold and moist humour, phlegm is
engendered, and goes to the lungs for its reception, or
(as physicians say) to the spleen; but the blood, which
is the most noble humour, is engendered in the liver,
which is its proper place.


Of Carnal Copulation.

     Why do living creatures use carnal copulation?

     Because it is the most natural work that is in them
to beget their like, for if copulation were not, all
procreation had sunk ere now.

     What is this carnal copulation?

     It is a mutual action of male and female, with
instruments ordained for that purpose to propagate their
kind; and therefore divines say, it is a sin to use that
act for any other end.

     Why is this action good in those who use it lawfully
and moderately?

     Because, say Avicen and Const, it eases and lightens
the body, clears the mind, comforts the head and senses,
and expels the melancholy. Therefore, sometimes through
the omission of this act, dimness of sight doth ensue,
and giddiness, besides the seed of man retained above its
due time is converted into some infectious humour.

     Why is immoderate carnal copulation hurtful?

     Because it destroys the sight, drys the body, and
impairs the brain; often causes fevers, as Avicen and
experience show; it shortens life too, as is evident in
the sparrow, which, by reason of it often coupling, lives
but three years.

     Why doth carnal copulation injure melancholy or
choleric men. especially thin men?

     Because it drys the bones much, which are naturally
so. On the contrary, it is good for the phlegmatic and
sanguine, as Avicen says, because they abound with that
substance which by nature is necessarily expelled. Though
Aristotle affirms, that every fat creature has but little
seed because the substance turns to fat.

     Why don't female brute beasts covet carnal
copulation after they be great with young?

     Because then the womb or matrix is shut, and desire
doth cease.

     Why should not the act be used when the body is
full?

     Because it hinders digestion, and it is not good for
a hungry belly, because it weakens him.

     Why is it not good after a birth?

     Because then the pores are open, and the heat
disperses through, the body; yet after bathing it cools
the body very much.

     Why is it not proper after vomiting or looseness?

     Because it is dangerous to purge twice in one day;
but so it is in this act the reins are purged, and the
guts by the vomit.

     Why are wild beasts furious when they couple, as
appears in asses which bray; and harts, who are mad
almost, as Hippocrates says?

     Their blood is kindled with desire, and nature also
labours to expel superfluities in them, which dispose to
anger and madness: therefore the act done, they are tame
and gentle.

     Why is there such delight in the act of venery?

     Because this act is a base and contemptible thing in
itself, insomuch that all creatures would naturally abhor
it were there no pleasure in it, and therefore nature
readily uses it, that all kinds of living things should
be maintained and kept.

     Why do such as use it often take less delight in it
than those who come to it seldom?

     For three reasons: First, because the passages of
the seed are over large and wide, therefore, it makes no
stay there, which would cause the delight. Secondly,
because that through often evacuation there is little
seed left, therefore no delight. Thirdly, because such,
instead of seed, cast out blood undigested and raw, or
some other watery substance which is not hot, and
therefore affords no delight.

     Whether can this carnal copulation be done by the
mouth, so that beasts may conceive thereby, as some say
of pigeons, that by kissing they do it, and conceive,
some say that it is true in the weasel and ermine?

     According to Aristotle it is false; for though
pigeons do kiss by the beak, yet they do not couple this
way nor conceive. And because the weasel carries his
young ones from place to place in his mouth they are of
that opinion; wherefore Aristotle says, whatever goes in
at the mouth is consumed by digestion, and if the seed
should go in at the mouth then that would be consumed by
digestion. The major part is plain, the conclusion doth
hold in Davii.


Of the Seed of Man or Beasts.

     How, and of what cometh the seed of man?

     There are diverse opinions of philosophers and
physicians on this point. Some say it is a superfluous
humour of the fourth digestion; others say, that the seed
is pure blood flowing from the brain, concocted and
whitened in the testicles, and some again say it is the
superfluity of the second or third digestion; but because
sweat, urine, spittle, phlegm, choler, and the like,
Aristotle says, the seed is always the superfluity of the
last nutriment, that is of blood dispersed throughout the
body, and comes chiefly from the heart, liver, and brain:
an argument of this is, because those parts are greatly
weakened by casting seed, and therefore it appears that
carnal copulation is not good. But some think this to be
true by over-vehement practice in this act; but
moderately used, it is very wholesome, as was said
before.

     Why is a man's seed white, and a woman's red?

     It is white in men by reason of his great heat and
quick digestion, because rarefied in the testicles; but a
woman's is red, because it is the superfluity of the
second digestion, which is done in the liver. Or else we
may say, it is because the terms corrupt the undigested
blood, and hath its colour.

     Doth the seed of man come from the parts of the
body, or from the humours?

     Some say from the parts of the body, and that we
prove, because we find a lame man begets a lame child;
and if the father hath a scar, the child hath one also,
as Aristotle alleges, Lib. de Animal, which could not be
if the seed did not fall from the parts of the body. Some
say it comes from the humours, by reason it is made of
the last nutriment, and that is no part but a humour. As
for lameness or scars, that proceeds from the imagination
of the mother at the time of carnal copulation, as
Aristotle saith, Lib. de Generat. Animal.

     How comes the imagination of the mother to bring
forth a blackamore, as Albertus Magnus reports of a
queen, whoa in the act of carnal copulation, imagined a
black being printed, and in her sight?

     Avicen says, the imagination of a fall makes a man
fall, and the imagination of a leprosy makes a man a
leper. So in this the imagination is above the forming
power and therefore the child born followeth the
imagination, and not the power of forming and shaping,
because it is weakest.

     Doth the man's seed enter into the substance of the
child?

     The seed of both father and mother go into the
substance of the child in the womb, as cream goeth to the
substance of the cheese. Yet this opinion doth not seem
to be of force, therefore, according to our author, and
other philosophers we say the seed doth not go into the
substance of the child; and it is proved thus, because
that so the matter and the efficient cause should be all
one, which is against the philosopher. The consequence is
good, because seed is the efficient cause of the house,
and therefore is not the material cause of the child.
This is proved another way: As there is the self-same
material cause of nourishment and generation, 2 de Anima,
so we have our being and nourishment of the same matter;
but the seed cannot be the material cause of nourishment,
according to Averrois, therefore not of the being: and as
both seeds are shut up in the womb, so that of the man
disposeth and prepares the woman's to receive the form,
perfection, or soul; which being done, it is converted
into a humidity that is breathed out by the pores of the
matrix.

     How comes females to have monthly courses?

     Because they are cold in respect of men, and because
all their nourishment cannot be converted into blood, a
great part whereof turns to menses, which are monthly
expelled; I mean every woman in health, and of thirteen
years old, seldom before; nay, some distempered women
have them not at all.

     For what reason do they not come down before
thirteen?

     Because young women are hot and digest all their
nourishment, therefore have them not before that age.

     For what reason do they leave off at fifty?

     Some answer that old women be barren, and therefore
they cease; but a better answer is that then nature is
weaker in them, and therefore they cannot expel them by
reason of weakness; there is great store of immundicities
bred in them, which lies in a lump; this makes them
troubled with coughs and other infirmities. Men should
refrain their use at those times.

     Why have not breeding women the menses?

     Because that then they turn into milk, and into the
nourishment of the child; for if a woman with child have
them, it is a sign she will miscarry.

     Why are they termed Menstrua, from the word mensis,
a month?

     Because it is a space of time which measures the
moon as she ends her course in twenty-nine days and
fourteen hours. Now the moon hath dominion over most
things, and by reason the menses are humid, they are
called menses profluvium; for moist things increase and
decrease as the moon does.

     Why do they continue longer with some than others,
as with some six or seven, but commonly with all three
days?

     The first are colder, therefore they increase most
in them, and consequently are longer in expelling; other
women are more hot, and therefore they have fewer, and
are soon expelled.

     Where are the terms retained before they run?

     Some say in the matrix or womb; but Averrois says,
the matrix is the place for the generation, and that
those terms further not generation at all. Therefore he
asserts, that there are certain veins about the back-bone
which retain them; a sign of which is, those women at
that time have great pains in their back.

     Whether are the menses which are expelled, and those 
which the child is engendered of, all one?

     No, because the one are unclean, and unfit for that
purpose, but the other very pure and clean, therefore
fittest for generation.

     Why doth those got with child when they have the
terms upon them bring forth weak and leprous children?

     Because they are venomous; so the cause appears in
the effect, as philosophers say the effect carrieth the
likeness or the cause; therefore such a child must needs
be ill disposed of body.

     Why hath not women these at one and the same time,
but some in the new moon, some in the full, and others at
the wane?

     By reason of their several complexions; and though
all women (in respect of men) are phlegmatic, yet some
are more sanguine than others, some more choleric; and as
months have their quarters, so have women their
complexions, the first sanguine, the second choleric. One
of a sanguine complexion hath her terms in the first
quarter, a choleric in the second, a melancholy in the
third, and so in the rest.

     Why have the sanguine theirs in the first quarter?

     Because, saith Galen, every such thing added to such
a thing doth make it more such: therefore the first
quarter of the moon increaseth blood in a sanguine
complexion, and then she expels it.

     How do they come in the end of the month?

     Because most women then are phlegmatic, and the last
quarter is phlegm. Or else it proceeds from defect, and
therefore cold works do then multiply the matter, and so
multiplied, is then expelled.

     How happens pain and grief at that time?

     Because it is like the pain of the stranguary, in
making water drop by drop: for the stranguary, by reason
of the drink undigested, offends the subtile passage of
the urine, as happens after bathing; so the menses,
undigested and of an earthly substance, hurt the passage
by which they go.

     Why do women easily conceive after their menses?

     Because the womb being cleaned, they are better
prepared for conception.

     Why do women look pale when they are upon them?

     Because then the heat goes from the outward parts of
the body to the inward, to help nature and expel their
terms, which depravation of heat doth cause a paleness in
the face. Or else it is because that flux is caused of
raw humours which when they run they make the face
colourless.

     Why do they at that time abhor their meat?

     Because nature labours more to expel their terms
than digest, and therefore if they should eat, it would
remain raw in the stomach.

     Why are some women barren and cannot conceive?

     According to physicians, for divers reasons; first,
because it proceeds sometimes of the man, who may be of a
cold nature, so his seed is unfit for generation;
secondly, because it is waterish, and so doth not stay in
the womb; thirdly, by reason the seed in them both has
not a like proportion, as if the man be melancholy and
the woman phlegmatic; for it is evident in philosophy,
that the agent and the patient ought to have the same
proportion, else the action is hindered.

     Why do fat women seldom conceive with child?

     Because they have a slippery womb, and the seed will
not stay in; or else because the mouth of the matrix is
very straight, and the seed cannot enter in, or if it
does, it is so very slowly that it grows cold in the mean
time, so is unfit for generation, and is dissolved into a
fleshy substance.

     Why do those of very hot constitutions seldom
conceive with child?

     Because the seed in them is extinguished or put out
as water cast into fire; wherefore we find, that women
who vehemently desire the flesh seldom conceive with
child.

     Why are whores never with child?

     By reason of diverse seeds, which corrupt and spoil
the instruments of conception, for it makes them so
slippery that they cannot retain seed. Or else it is
because one man's seed destroys another, so neither is
good for generation. Albertus says, the best thing to
help conception is to take the matrix of a hare beat to
powder, and so put in drink.

     Why have some women long and slender children, and
others short and thick?

     Because, as Galen and Averrois say, the child is
formed according to the dimensions of the womb:
wherefore, because some women have a long and narrow
womb, their children are long and slender, others, on the
contrary, short and large, therefore their children be
short and thick.

     For why doth a woman conceive twins?

     According to Galen, because there are several cells
or receptacles in the womb, wherefore they may naturally
have so many children at once; as there falls seed in
those cells: there are three in the right side and three
in the left: in the right side boys are engendered; in
the left girls; and in the midst of these cells or
chambers there is another where the ancients assert
hermaphrodites to be engendered: if a woman should have
more than two children at once, it should be rather
miraculous than natural.

     Why are twins but half men, and not so strong as
other men?

     By reason the seed which should have been for one is
divided into two, and therefore they are weakly, and in
truth do not often live long.


Of Hermaphrodites.


     How are hermaphrodites begotten?

     There are seven cells in the womb, three on the
right side, three on the left, and a seventh in the
centre, into which the seed falls; an hermaphrodite is
said to be begotten in this manner, because nature doth
always tend to that which is best, therefore she doth
always intend to beget the male, and not the female,
because the female is only for the male's sake: therefore
the male is sometimes begotten in all its principal
parts; and yet through the evil disposition of the womb
and object, and inequality of the seed when nature cannot
perfect and end the male, she brings forth the female
too. And therefore the natural philosopher says, an
hermaphrodite is impotent in the privy parts of man, as
appears by experience.
 
     Why doth not nature dispose in him two secret parts
of man, or two of a woman?

     Because nature should then make one of them in vain;
but that is against the philosophers, who say that God
and nature make nothing in vain.

     Is an hermaphrodite accounted a man or woman?

     It is to be considered in which member he is fitted
for the act of copulation; if he be fittest in the
woman's then it is a woman; if in the man's he is a man.

     Should he be baptised in the name of a man or a
woman?

     In the name of a man, because names are given ad
placitum.

     Shall he stand in judgment in the name of a man or
woman?

     According to the law he should first swear, before
he be admitted to judgment, which secret part he can use,
and so is to be admitted according to the use and power
of that part.


Of Monsters.


     Doth nature make any monsters?

     She doth, for if she did not, she would then be
deprived of her end. For of things possible she doth
always propose to bring forth that which is most perfect
and best; but in the end, through the evil disposition of
the matter, and influence of some special constellation,
not being able to bring forth that which she intended,
she brings forth that which she can. As it happened in
Albertus' time, when in a certain village a cow brought
forth a cow half a man, then the countryman suspecting a
shepherd, would have burnt him with the cow; but
Albertus, being skilful in astronomy, said, that this did
proceed from a special constellation, and so delivered
the shepherd from their hands.

     Be they one or two?

     Aristotle saith, you must look into the heart, and
if there be two hearts there be two men.

     Why is a man horn sometimes with a great head and
six fingers on one hand, or with four?

     Aristotle saith it proceeds of superfluity and
abundance of matter, when there is too much matter, then
he is born with a great head, or six fingers; but if
there be want of matter, then there is some part too
little, or less than it ought to be.


Of Infants.


     Why are some children altogether like the father,
some like the mother, some to both, and some to neither?

     If the seed of the father do wholly overcome that of
the mother, the child doth wholly resemble the father;
but if the mother's predominate, then it is like the
mother; but if he be like neither, that doth happen for
many causes; sometimes through the four qualities,
sometimes through the influence of some heavenly
constellation. Albertus gives an example, and saith, that
there was on a time a good constellation for begetting
hogs and a child was then begotten and brought forth,
which had a face like a hog; and according to this divers
sorts of monsters are brought forth.

     Why are children oftener like the father than the
mother?

     That proceeds of imagination of the mother in the
act of copulation, and therefore by reason of the strong
imagination in the time of conception, the children get
the disposition of the father; as appeared before of the
queen which had her imagination on a blackamoor, and of
an Ethiopian queen, which brought forth a white child,
because her imagination was upon a white colour; as is
seen in Jacob's skill in casting rods of divers colours
into the water when his sheep went to ram.

     Why doth children sometimes resemble more the
grandfathers and great-grandfathers than their parents?

     Because the virtue and force of the grandfather is
grafted in the heart of the begetter, and it may be said
that sometimes it doth proceed of the similitude of the
nutriture, and then the child is formed by the similitude
of the grandfather.

     Why doth children, according to the common course
and use of nature, come out of the mother's womb in the
ninth month?

     Because the child is then fully perfect, or else
because some benign place doth reign, as Jupiter, who is
a friend of nature; for according to astronomers, he is
hot and moist; and therefore doth temper the malice and
naughtiness of Saturn, which is cold and dry; and
therefore for the most part children born in the ninth
month are healthful.

     Why do children born in the eighth month for the
most part die quickly; and why are they called the
children of the moon?

     Because the moon is a cold planet, which has
dominion over the child, and therefore doth bind it with
its coldness, which is the cause of its death.

     Why doth a child cry as soon as it is born?

     Because of the sudden change from heat to cold,
which cold doth hurt its tenderness. Another reason is,
because the child's soft and tender body is wringed and
put together, coming out of the narrow and straight
passage of the matrix, and especially the brain being
moist, and the head pressed and wrinkled together, is the
cause that some humours do distil by the eyes which are
the cause of tears and weeping. The divines say, it is
for the transgression of our first fathers and original
sin.

     Why doth a child put his finger into his mouth when
he cometh first into the world?

     Because that coming out of the womb be cometh out of
a hot bath, and entering into the cold puts his fingers
into his mouth for want of heat.

     How doth a child come into the world out of the
womb?

     He cometh forth with the head forward; for if he
should come with the thighs or arms he would kill himself
and the mother.


Of the Young One in the Womb.


     How is the young one engendered in the womb?

     The first six days the seed hath the colour of milk,
but in the six days following a red colour, which is near
unto the disposition of flesh, and then is changed into a
thick substance of blood; but in twelve days following
this substance is made so thick and sound that it is able
to receive shape and form, because a fluid or running
substance steepeth on till its birth. And how it is
governed every month by the planets, Boetius tells us
elsewhere.

     Doth the child in the womb void excrement or make
water?

     No; and the reason is, because he hath the first
digestion which is in the stomach; he receives no food by
the mouth, but it comes to him at the navel; he therefore
makes no urine, but sweats, which at best is but little,
and is received in a skin in the matrix, and at his birth
is cast out.

     Why doth the child come out of the matrix easily
after seven, eight or nine months?

     Because, saith Galen, when the fruit is ripe, then
the ligaments are broken, and so it falls out.


Of Abortion and Untimely Birth.


     Why do women that eat unwholesome meats easily
miscarry?
Because it breeds putrefied seed in them, which the mind
abhorring doth cast it out of the womb, as unfit for the
most noble shape which is adapted to receive the soul.

     Why doth wrestling or leaping cause the casting of
the child as some subtile women used to do on purpose?

     The vapour is burning and doth easily hurt the
tender substance of the child, entering in at the pores
of the matrix. Albertus says, if the child be near
delivery, lightning and thunder will kill it.

     Why doth thunder and lightning rather cause young
women than old to miscarry?

     Because the bodies of young women are fuller of
pores, and more slender and therefore the lightning
sooner enters into their body; but old ones have a thick
skin, well compacted, therefore the vapours cannot enter.

     Why do much joy cause a woman to miscarry?

     Because in the time of joy a woman is destitute of
heat, and so the miscarriage doth follow.

     Why do women easily miscarry when they are first
with child, viz., the first, second, or third month?

     As apples and pears easily fall at first, because
the knots and ligaments are weak, so it is of a child in
the womb.

     Why is it hard to miscarry when they are come to the
midst of their times, as three, four, five, or six
months?

     Because then the ligaments are stronger and well
fortified.


Of Divers Matters.

     Why have some women greater grief than others in
child-birth?

     For three reasons: first, for the largeness of the
child; secondly, the midwife being unskilful; and
thirdly, because the child is dead, and cannot be bowed.
For the contrary causes some have less pain.

     Why has not a man a tail like a beast?

     Because a man is a noble creature, whose property is
to sit; so a beast cannot that hath a tail.

     Why do such as keep hot houses expel the heat of the
furnace better with cold water than hot?

     By reason they are contrary qualities, which work
strongly one against the other, therefore the heat is
easier expelled from the stone.

     Why does hot water freeze sooner than cold?

     Because hot water is thinner, and gives better
entrance to the frost.

     Why is every living thing dull after copulation?

     By reason the act is filthy and unclean; and so
every living creature abhors it; when men do think upon
it they are ashamed and sad.

     Why cannot drunken men judge of tastes as well as
sober ones?

     Because the tongue being full of pores and spungy,
it receives great moisture in it, and more in drunken men
than in sober; therefore the tongue (though often
drinking) is full of bad humours; and because it is so,
the faculty of taste is rendered out of order; therefore
through the thickening of the mean, i.e., taste itself,
drink taken by drunkards is not presently felt, for to a
due feeling it is requisite to have a due proportion of
the mean. And by this is also understood why drunkards
have not a perfect speech then.

     Why have melancholy beasts long ears; and why are
not those men wise for the most part that have long ears,
but those others wise with short ones?

     The ears proceed from a cold and dry substance
called a gristle which is apt to become a bone; and
because melancholy beasts do abound with this kind of
substance, they have long ears.

     How comes the other to be half witted?

     Because the minds and souls follow the bodies, for
if the senses of the body be subtile, the soul exercises
subtile operation, as well active as speculative, and the
contrary is in a gross body.

     How is the intellectual soul joined to a child in
the womb of the mother; and how does the man who begets
it make the matter apt and fit to receive the soul?

     Divines say, that into a substance sufficiently
disposed and made fit God doth infuse the intellectual
soul; and St. Augustine says the like. The soul in
creating is infused, and infusing is created.

     Why do hares sleep with their eyes open?

     Because they have their eyes standing out, and their
eyelids short, therefore never quite shut. Another reason
is, they are timorous, and, as a safeguard to themselves,
sleep with their eyes open.

     Why don't crows feed their young till they be nine
days old?

     Because seeing them of another colour they think
they are of another kind; meanwhile God feeds them with
heavenly dew, as the Psalmist saith. He who doth give
beasts their food and young crows, which call upon him.

     Why are sheep and pigeons mild creatures?

     Because they want galls, which stir anger.

     Why have birds their stones inwards?
Because if they were outward they would hinder their
flying and lightness.

     How comes it that birds don't piss?

     Because that superfluity which would be converted
into urine is turned into feathers, for there is much
moisture in the feathers. Another reason is they are in
continual motion, therefore moisture in them is dried up
by air or wind.

     How comes long eggs to be a sign and cause of the
male; and flat short eggs of the female?

     Hippocrates says, it is the property of heat to
ascend from the centre to the circumference of cold.
Therefore if there be any long eggs, it is a sign they
have a great heat, and therefore pass into the substance
of the male, for in every kind the male is hotter than
the female, as philosophers say. If the eggs be short and
flat, it is a sign the heat is small and undispersed, and
goeth into the substance of the female.

     How do we hear the better by night than by day?

     Because (as Aristotle saith) there is a greater
quietness in the night than in the day, for the sun doth
not exhale the vapours of the night, but it doth in the
day, therefore the mean is more fit than ready, and the
mean being fit, the motion is better done by it, which is
said to be done by a sound. Another reason is, there are
motions of the air and sounds in the day more than in the
night, which hinders one another; in the night there is
silence, which is opposite to sound, and opposites put
one against the other show the better.

     For what reason doth a man laugh sooner when touched
in the arm-pits than in the other parts of the body?

     Because there is in that place a meeting of many
sinews, and the mean we touch (which is the flesh) is
more subtile there than in other parts, and therefore a
better feeling. And this is true if that place be not
touched too roughly, if you do so, then there is not that
delight; when a man is moderately and generally touched
there, the spirits that are there dispersed run into the
face and thence it causes laughter.

     How comes wood burnt to be converted into black coal
and a bone burnt into a white substance?

     Because the wood before it was burnt was moist, and
so after burning getteth heat accidentally; and that heat
is not able to consume all the moisture of the wood, and
therefore there remaineth some after the burning, which
is converted into black substance, because the humidity
of the wood was slimy, and could not altogether be
consumed by the fire. But a bone of its own nature is
cold and dry, having but small moisture in it, which the
burning doth wholly consume, and so accidentally, the
moisture being consumed, the body waxeth white.

     Why do some women love white men and some black?

     There are two answers: some women have a weak sight;
and such delight in black, because white doth hurt the
sight more than black. The second reason is, because like
delights in the like but some women are of a hot nature,
and such are delighted with black because blackness doth
follow heat. And others are of a cold nature, and these
are delighted with white, because cold is the mother of
whiteness.

     Why do men willingly sleep after labour?

     Because that through continual moving the heat is
dispersed to the external part of the body which after
labour is past, is gathered together to the internal
parts of digestion, there to digest; and from digestion
vapours do rise from the heart to the brain, which do
stop the passages, by which the natural heat should be
dispersed to the external part; and then the external
parts being cold and thick by reason of the coldness of 
the brain, sleep is easily procured. And by this it
appeareth, that such as eat and drink too much do sleep
much and long, because there are great store of humours
and vapours bred in such persons, which cannot be
digested and consumed of the natural heat.

     Why are such as sleep much evil disposed and ill
coloured?

     Because, that in sleep much moisture is gathered
together, which cannot be consumed, which is expelled in
taking, and so it doth covet to go out through the
superficial part of the body, and especially it resorts
to the face, and therefore is the cause of a bad colour,
as it appeareth in such as be phlegmatic, and who desire
more sleep than others.

     Why doth it appear unto some in their sleep that
they eat and drink sweet things?

     Because the phlegm drawn up by the jaws doth distil
and drop to the throat, and this phlegm is after a sore
sweat, and therefore that seemeth so to them.

     Why do some dream in their sleep that they are in
the water and drowned, and some that they be in water and
not drowned; and this doth happen especially in such as
are phlegmatic?

     The reason is (as Aristotle saith) because the
phlegmatic substance doth burn to the high parts of the
body, and then they think they are in the water and
drowned; and when that substance draweth unto the
internal parts, then they think they escape. Another
reason may be, overmuch repletion and drunkenness: and
therefore, when a man is overmuch filled with meat, the
fumes and vapours ascend and gather together, and
therefore they think that they are drowned and strangled;
but if they cannot ascend so high, then they seem to
escape.

     May a man procure a dream by an external cause?

     Aristotle holdeth that it may be done, if a man do 
speak softly at a man's ear, and awake him, then of this
stirring of the spirits there are thunderings and
buzzings in the head, and so dream of that. And so some
men have dreams by divine revelations when it pleaseth
God to send any.

     How many humours are there in a man's body?

     Four, whereof every one hath its proper place in
man's body. the first is choler, which physicians call
stava bills, as is placed in the liver. The second is
melancholy, called atra bilis, whose seat is in the
spleen. The third is phlegm, whose place is in the head.
The fourth is blood, whose place is in the head.

     What condition and quality hath a man of a sanguine
complexion?

     Re is fair and beautiful, he hath his hair for the
most part smooth: he is bold, he retaineth that which he
hath conceived; he is shame-faced, given to music, a
lover of sciences, liberal, courteous, and desires no
revenge.

     What properties do follow a phlegmatic complexion?

     They are dull of wit, their hair never curls, they
are seldom very thirsty, they are much given to sleep,
they dream of things belonging to the water, they are
fearful, covetous, given to heap up riches, are weak in
the act of venery.

     What properties do follow the choleric man?

     He is furious and angry, quarrelsome, given to war,
pale coloured and unquiet; thinks much, sleeps little,
and desires much the company of women.

     What properties do follow the melancholy man?

     He is unquiet, brown in complexion, his veins
hidden, he eateth little, and digesteth less; when he
dreameth it is of dark, confused things; he is sad,
fearful, exceeding covetous and incontinent, unless he
bridle his affection.

     What dreams do follow these complexions?

     Pleasant, merry dreams do follow the sanguine
complexion, fearful dreams the melancholy, the choleric
dream of children, fighting and fire, and the phlegmatic
dream of water. And this is the reason why a man's
complexion is said to be known by his dreams.

     What is the reason that if you cover an egg aver
with salt, and let it lie in it a few days, all the meat
within is consumed?

     The great dryness of the salt doth consume the
substance of the egg: but in sand some say they may be
kept as long as the mariners do please.

     Why is the melancholy complexion the worst of all?

     Because it is the dregs of blood, which is an enemy
to mirth, and farthest from the beginning of man's life,
and bringeth old age and death, because it is cold and
dry.

     Why is the phlegmatic for the most part dull of wit?

     Because that the vivacity of wit proceedeth of heat,
so of cold the contrary, which they are subject unto.

     Wherefore doth it proceed that some men die with
extreme joy, and some with extreme grief?

     Over-great joy doth overmuch heat the internal parts
of the body, and overmuch grief doth drown and suffocate
the heat, the which failing a man dieth.

     Why hath a man so much hair on his head?

     The hair of the head proceedeth of the vapours which
ariseth from the stomach, and ascend to the head, and
also of the superfluities which are in the brain; and
those two passing through the pores of the head are
converted into hair, by reason of the heat and dryness of
the head. And because man's body is full of humours, and
hath more brains than other creatures, and also more
superfluities in the brains, which the brain expelleth,
it followeth that he hath more hair than other living
creatures.

     How many ways is the brain purged, and other hidden
places of the body?

      The watery and gross humours are purged by the
eyes, melancholy by the ears, choler by the nose, and
phlegm by the hair.

     What is the reason that such as are very fat in
their youth are in danger to die on a sudden?

     Such have very small and close veins, by reason of
their fatness, for that the air and breath can hardly
have free course in them; and thereupon the natural heat
wanting some refreshment of the air is put out, and as it
were, quenched.

     Why doth garlic and onions grow after they are
gathered?

     It produceth of the great humidity which is in them.

     Why do men feel cold sooner than women?

     Because that men being more hot than women, have
their pores more open, and therefore the cold doth sooner
enter into them than women.

     Why are not old men so much subject to the plague as
young men and children?

     They are cold, and therefore the pores are shut up,
and not so open as in youth; and therefore the infecting
air doth not penetrate so soon as when they are open, as
in youth, by reason of heat.

     Why do we cast water into a man's face when he
swooneth? Because that through the coldness of the water
the heat may run to the heart, and so give strength.

     Why are those waters best and more delicate which
run to wards the sun rising?

     Because they are soonest stricken with the sun
beams, and made pure and subtile, because the sun hath
them long under him, and by that means takes off the
coldness and gross vapours which they gather from the
ground they run through.

     Why have women such weak small voices?

     Because their instruments and organs of speaking, by
reason they are cold, are small and narrow; and therefore
receiving but little air, causeth the voice to be small
and effeminate.

     Whereof doth it proceed that want of sleep doth
weaken the brain and the body?

     Much watching doth engender choler, the which being
hot, doth dry up and lessen the humours which conserve
the brain, the head and other parts of the body.

     Whereof doth it proceed that vinegar doth stanch
blood?

     It proceedeth of its cold virtue, for all cold
naturally is binding, and vinegar being cold hath the
like property.

     Why is the sea water salter in summer than in
winter?

     It proceedeth from the heat of the sun, seeing by
experience that a salt thing being heated becometh more
salt.

     Why do men live longer in hot regions than in cold?

     Because they may be more dry, and by that means the
natural heat is better conserved in them than in cold
countries, because the cold doth extinguish the heat.

     Why is well water seldom or ever good?

     All water which standeth still in the spring, and is
never heated by the sun beams, is very heavy, and hath
much earthy matter in it; and therefore wanting the heat
of the sun is naught.

     Why do men sleep better and more at case on the
right side than on the left?

     Because when we lie on the left, the lungs do lie
upon and cover the heart, which is on that side under the
pap. Now the heart, the fountain of life, being thus
occupied and hindered with the lungs, cannot exercise its
own proper operation, as being overmuch heated with the
lungs lying on it, and therefore wanting the refreshment
of the air which the lungs do give it, like the blowing a
pair of bellows, choked and suffocated; but by lying on
the right side these inconveniences are avoided.

     Whereof doth it proceed that the holding of the
breath doth cause vexing to cease?

     Because the holding the breath doth heat the
internal parts of the body. And this heat chafeth away
the vexation, being nothing else but a cold air within
the body.

     What is the reason that old men sneeze with
difficulty?

     Because that through their coldness their arteries
are very narrow and close, and therefore the heat is not
of force to the cold; for I think sneezing is like the
combat in the air made by thunder, which is caused by
heat and cold.

     Why doth a drunken man think that all things about
him doth turn round?

     Because the spirits which serve the sight are
mingled with vapours, fumes, and the wine: and then the
overmuch heat causeth the eye to be in a continual
moving; and the eye being round, causeth all things about
it to seem to go round.

     Wherefore doth it proceed, that bread which is made
with salt is lighter than that which is made without it,
considering salt is very heavy of itself?

     Although bread is heavy of itself, yet the salt
dries it, doth make it light by reason of the heat which
it hath, which heat doth dry, and the more heat there is
in it the better the bread is, the lighter and more
wholesome for the body.

     Why is not new bread good for the stomach?

     Because it is full of moistness, and thick, and hot
vapours, which do corrupt the blood. And hot bread is
blacker than cold, because heat is the mother of
blackness, and because the vapours are not gone out of
it.

     Why doth lettuce make man sleep?

     Because they engender gross vapours.

     Why doth the dregs of wine and oil go to the bottom,
and those of honey swim uppermost?

     Because the dregs of wine and oil are earthy and not
purged before, and therefore being of the nature of earth
do go to the bottom; but honey is a liquor, which cometh
from the stomach and belly of the bee, and there in some
sort purified and made subtile; and by that means that
which remains is tight and hot, and therefore goes
upwards.

     Why do cats' and wolves' eyes shine in the night and
not in the day?

     The eyes of these beasts are by nature mare
crystalline than the eyes of other beasts, and therefore
do shine as they do; but the brightness of the sun doth
hinder them to be seen in the daytime.

     What is the reason that some men when they see
others dance do the like with the hands and feet, or by
some other gesture of the body?

      The answer is, because the sight having carried and
represented unto the mind that action, and judging the
same to he pleasant and delightful, and therefore
(desiring it) the imagination draweth the likeness of it
in conceit, and stirs up the body by the gestures.

     Why do much sleep causeth some to grow fat and some
lean?

     Those which are of ill complexion, when they sleep,
do consume and digest the superfluities of that they have
eaten, and therefore become fat. But such as are of good
complexion, when they sleep are much more cold, and so
digest less.

     How and for what cause do we suffer hunger better
than thirst?

     When the stomach hath nothing to consume it
consumeth phlegm and humours which it findeth most ready
and most at hand; and therefore we suffer hunger better
than thirst, because the heat hath nothing to refresh it
withal.

     Why doth the hair fall after a great sickness?

     Where the sickness is long, as an ague, the humours
of the head are dried up through overmuch heat, and
therefore wanting nourishment they fall.

     Why doth the hair of the eye-brows grow long in old
men?

     Because that through their age the bones of the
eyelids are thin, by reason of the want of heat, and
therefore the hair doth grow there, by reason of the
rheums of the eyes. The like doth happen in such as
imagine much, because that with their heat they draw up
many humours to the fore part of the head, where the
imagination is placed.

     Whereof proceedeth gapings?

     Of gross vapours which occupy the vital spirits of
the head, and the senses are cold, making them ready to
sleep.

     What is the reason that some flowers do open with
the sun rising and some with the sun setting?

     Cold doth close and shut as hath been said, but the
heat of the sun doth open and enlarge; some do compare
the sun to the soul of the body; for as the soul giveth
life, and when it departeth, death followeth; so the sun
doth give life, and vivicate all things; the cold
bringeth death, withering and decaying of all things.

     Why do grief cause men to grow old and grey?

     Age is nothing else but a dryness and want of
humours in the body; grief then causeth alteration, and
alteration heat, and heat dryness; age followeth
immediately, and greyness.

     Why are gelded beasts weaker than such as are not
gelded?

     Because they have lesser heat, and by that means
lesser force and strength.


Marcus Antonius Zimaras Sanctipertia's Problems.


     Why is it esteemed in the judgment of the most wise
the hardest thing to know a man's self?

     It is because nothing can be known; its form and
perfection cannot be found; to know the form and
perfection of a man's self, as it cometh unto the
philosopher, is a matter hard enough, and a man, by the
authority of Plato, either is nothing, or if he be any
thing, he is nothing but his soul. Or, is it because it
cannot be done by a reflected action, and to reflect and
look unto himself is a token that he is separated by the
flesh: for lie who would know himself should be drawn
from sensible affections; and how hard this is no man is
ignorant of? Or, is it because a man liveth by
understanding? But the understanding of a man cannot
conceive himself, but alter the understanding of cases
which is very hard.

     Why is a man, being endued with reason the most
unjust of all living creatures?

     It is because man only is desirous of honour, it
comes to pass that every one covets to seem good, and yet
naturally shun labour, though he attains no virtue by it;
or else it is because the nature of a sophister is rather
to seem than to be and not seem; but very few do attain
to true virtue.

     Why doth immoderate copulation do more hurt than
immoderate letting of blood?

     It is because the seed is fuller of spirit and
nutriment, better disposed and prepared for the nature of
the body than the blood; for says Galen, the seed is the
cause of the substantial parts of the body, and of it the
body grows and is nourished. And he who is hungry is hurt
more by taking away of bread than flour, so the body is
weakened by taking away seed than by evacuating blood.

     What is the reason those that have a very long yard
cannot beget children?

     Whether is it because the seed in going a long
distance the spirit doth breathe out, and therefore is
cold and unfit for generation.

     Why do such as are corpulent cast forth little seed
in the act of copulation, and are often barren?

     It is because the seed of such goes to nourishing
the body: for the same reason corpulent women have but
few menses.

     How come women prone to venery in the summer time,
and men in winter?

     It is because at that time his testicles hang down
and are feebler than in winter, or else because hot
natures become lively; for a man is hot and dry, a woman
cold and moist, and therefore in summer the strength of
men decays, and that of women increase, and she grows
livelier by the benefit of the contrary quality. And for
the same reason some beasts of a cold nature lie in dens
and holes, and through the frigidity of the air receive
little or no nourishment, but revive again when heat
comes.

     How comes man to be proudest of all living
creatures?

     Whether it is by reason of his great knowledge, or
that (as the philosophers say) all intelligent beings
having understanding, no thing remains that escapes man's
knowledge in particular: or, it is because he hath rule
over all earthly creatures, and all things seem to be
brought to his arbitrament? Or, shall I answer, that the
pride of man proceeds from his not knowing himself; for
truly would he remember that he is but dust and ashes,
came naked into the world, born to earn his bread by the
sweat of his brows, and after born to die, he would abhor
pride.

     How comes one man to understand one thing, and do
another?

     It is because there is in the same science contrary
things, or because the office of the mind is to reach at
many things, and the appetite tends to only one? and so a
man chiefly lives by under standing, and reason, but
beasts are governed by appetite, anger, and pleasure.

     How comes most women's wits unapt to good things,
and most prompt to naughty, as says Euripides?

     Because of a privation, which seems to be coupled
and joined to her nature: for as a woman is a man's hurt,
so the faculty of a privation is always to do mischief.

     Why do men say that a woman's first counsel should
be chosen?

     Because (as we see things that want reason) their
actions and motions are guided to their proper ends by a
superior power; for I think that is very true which is
said, That there's a Providence which puts in a dishonest
heart the desire of honesty, and in a poor man the desire
of wealth, as far as sufficient. So a woman's
understanding, though she knows not the reason of good
and evil, is sometimes directed by an infallible truth to
take some things in hand; but some things they undertake
of themselves are to be let alone, as weak, and subject
to many errors.

     How comes it that women desire to go fine, and deck
themselves rather than men?

     It is because by nature they are imperfect, so they
endeavour to supply their imperfections by art; or else
it is because they want the beauty of the mind, to study
to adorn their bodies.

     How comes it that a tall man is seldom wise?

     By reason the largeness of his body proceeds from
excess of heat, and abundance of humidity. Some wise men
think the perfection, accomplishment, and goodness of the
operation is perfected by dryness, which doth always go
and increase till it brings us to our end; for the
constitution of the body originally sprung from the last
humidity, but the vehemence and excess of heat overflows
the judgment, and hinders quietude.

     Why is a multitude of princes or rulers naught, as
Homer saith?

     It is because if the government should dwindle into
tyranny it is better to be under the yoke of one than
many; or because a multitude of rulers seldom regard the
good of the public. Hence it proceeds, that if once they
disagree, great loss is like to befall the commonality:
it is easier for one man to be well given than many; in
the government of many, there wants not strife, debate,
and envy. Wherefore is it justly said, that a multitude
of rulers are naught: for which reason let there be but
one prince at a time.

     Why have beasts their hearts in the middle of their
breast, and man his inclining towards the left side?

     It is because it should moderate the cold on that
side: for Aristotle says, man hath only the left side
cold. Or it is as physicians say, because it should give
place to the liver, which is on the right side.

     Why doth a woman love that man best who had her
maidenhead?

     It is because that the matter doth covet a form or
perfection, so doth a woman the male. Or it is by reason
of shamefacedness, for as Plato saith, shamefacedness
doth follow love. Or is it because the beginning of great
pleasure doth bring a great alteration in the whole,
whereby the powers of the mind are much delighted, and
stick and rest immovable in the same? Hesiod advises to
marry a maid.

     How comes the night, in full of moon, somewhat warm,
since (according to the mathematicians) the moon is cold
by night?

     Whether it is because the opinion of the
peripatetics ought to be preferred, which says, every
light heats in that respect it is reflected.

     How comes the night in autumn colder than in spring?

     It is because the air very thin, and bodies that are
rarefied are apt to receive heat or cold, as it is easily
seen in water, for water heated doth sooner freeze than
cold, because it is rarefied by heat.

     How are bodies sooner hurt with cold in autumn than
in spring?

     It is because the bodies which are accustomed to
cold do in  spring receive heat, and therefore the moving
or mutation is natural, and not surprising. But in autumn
they hasten from heat to cold, not being accustomed, and
without any mean. Galen says, nature doth not endure
sudden things.

     How comes hairy people to be more lustful than
others?

     Because in them is supposed great store of,
excrements and seed, as philosophers assert.

     What is the cause, as physicians say, that the
suffocation of the matrix, which happens to women through
strife and contention, is more dangerous than the
detaining of the flowers?

     Whether it is because that by how much the more an
excrement is perfect, so long as it doth continue in its
natural disposition, by so much the more it is worse when
it is removed from that, and drawn to the contrary
quality; as is seen in vinegar, which is the sharpest
when it is made of the best wine. And so it happens, that
the more men love one another, the more they hate when
they fall to variance and discord.

     Why doth the land which standeth still seem to move
unto such as sail by sea?

     It is because the nutriment of the sense of seeing
is accidentally moved when the ship is moved, whereby the
likeness and similitude of things are perceived and
received with the moving.

     Why do we love our sight above our senses?

     Whether it is (as Aristotle doth say) because it
doth show us the difference of things, or because its
knowledge is more drawn from material substance: Or is it
because the divine force of love is placed in that sense,
Plato saith.

     Why do we not judge a staff to be broken in the
water, seeing it doth so appear in the sense of sight?

     Whether is it because we perceive by the sense of
seeing and touching that the sight doth err? Or is it
because we do not judge with the same power as we do
imagine with? An argument of this, because the sun doth
seem to be but a foot round. And by a trick and moving of
the finger, one finger doth seem two, yet we do not yield
that they be two.

     Why do we put our hands over our eyes when we would
see any thing afar off?

     It is because the light should not be dispersed; and
so Aristotle saith, that those which have their eyes
standing out cannot see far: and contrary, such as have
them hollow in their head can see far because the moving
of the sight is not scattered.

     How do some people discern things near them and not
at a distance?

     it is through the weakness of the sight, for in such
the power of seeing is very weak; therefore they do need
a strong moving as it is also in such as have their eyes
standing out who cannot see far.

     Why do such as would shoot aright wink with one eye?

     Because the sight is strenthened and united, and so
fitter to perform this action.

     Why are such as have been long in the dark, if on a
sudden they come into the light, half blind?

     It is because nature cannot endure those sudden
mutations, or because the spirit of the sight is small
and weak, and therefore is, glad of the like, and so
dissolves when they come into the light. Or else it is
because of the desire of that light they wanted before,
which, when they behold too earnestly, their sight is
weakened, as it happens in some who have a long time
endured famine, and then eaten greedily take more than
they can digest, and so perish.

     Why can nothing be the cause of its own generation
and corruption?

     It is because the mover must be before the thing
moved, and  the engenderer before the thing engendered,
or that is impossible to be before itself.

     How come women's bodies looser, softer, and lesser
than men's? And why do they want hair?

     By reason of their menses, for with them their
superfluities go away which would produce hair, and where
the flesh is filled, consequently their veins are more
hid than men's.

     What is the reason that when we think upon an
horrible thing we are stricken with fear?

     It is because the conceit, thinking, and
understanding of things have force and virtue. For Plato
saith, the reason of things have some affinity with the
things themselves; for the image and representation of
cold and heat, in such as the nature of things are, as
the philosopher had said. Or is it because when we
comprehend any dreadful matter, the blood runneth to the
internal parts, and therefore the external parts are
cold, and shake with fear.

     Why doth a reddish root help digestion, and yet
itself remaineth undigested?

     Whether is it because the substance consisteth of
divers parts, for there are some thin parts in it which
are fit to digest meat, the which being dissolved, there
doth remain some thick and close substance in it, which
the heat cannot digest.

     Why do such as cleave wood cleave it easier in
length than athwart it?

     Whether is it because in wood there is a grain, if
it be cut in length, whereby in the very cutting one part
draweth another fast by?

     What is the reason, that if a spear be stricken on
the end the sound cometh sooner to one which standeth
near than to him which striketh?

     Whether is it because (as it hath been said) there
is a certain long grain in wood directly forward filled
with air, but cross; or one side there is none: and
therefore a beam or spear stricken on the end, the air
which is hidden receiveth a sound in the aforesaid grain,
which serveth for the passage of the air; and therefore,
seeing the sound cannot go easily cut, it is carried unto
the ear of him who is opposite to him, and those passages
do not go from side to side, and therefore a sound cannot
be distinctly heard.

     Why be not there fatuous men in every faculty in our
age?

     It is because the nature of man decayeth in our age;
and as Salinus saith succession being corrupted, the
progeny of our age is worse by birth; or it is because
such are not esteemed of princes; for take away the
reward due unto virtue, and no man will embrace it; or it
is ordained by nature that men do always complain of the
present time.

     Why are flatterers in great credit with princes?

     It is, as Plutarch saith by the authority of Plato,
because they love themselves much; immoderate love of
themselves causeth them to admit flatterers, and to give
them credit; or it is, as I think, because they want the
light of reason; for among birds, some through the
corruption of their nature delight in stinking meat; and
whom the day doth blind the night doth lighten.

     Why have philosophers for the most part in thee days
evil conditions?

     Is it because they are esteemed of princes? or is it
because of the philosophy itself they are accused of
crimes, and think therefore they are compelled to forsake
virtue and follow vice? or else deceived through error,
they think they have snatched to themselves some of her
rags; and therefore they are by us rather called
sophisters than philosophers, for certainly a philosopher
should be of a stout courage in all respects and in all
fortunes, for they reason badly, and therefore they
should give themselves unto philosophy, because they
would be honoured of princes; and their desire is not
ruled by nature, but by errors, and they are thrust
forward with streams of false credulity.

     Why do such as are angry wax pale in the beginning,
and after wards red?

     It is through the desire of revenge for that which
grieveth, that the heat and blood are called unto the
heart, and therefore of necessity the external parts are
pale, when they are determined to put that in execution
which they desire, the heat and blood do run into the
outward parts, and then they are greatly to be feared and
taken heed of.

     Why do serpents want a yard and stones?

     It is because they want thighs, and therefore do
want a yard, and then want stones, because of the length
of their body.

     Why do serpents turn their heads backwards, and the
rest of the body stand still?

     It is because (like unto those creatures which are
called Infecta) they are made of a winding composition,
and have their joints flexible, and made of gristles, and
this is the reason in serpents, and also because they may
void all those things which hurt them, for having no
feet, and being long in body, they cannot easily turn
them, whilst they bow against those things which are
behind them. It were to no purpose to lift up their head
if they could not exercise anger.

     Why is a camelion changed into many colours?

     Whether is it, as seemeth unto the philosopher,
because he is the tenderest of all footed beasts
engendered of eggs, and is stark cold for want of blood,
the cause is to be referred unto the quality of the mind:
through overmuch coldness be is of so many colours or it
is the property of fear to bind fast through want of
blood and heat.

     Why are the thighs and calves of the legs of men
fleshy, seeing the legs of beasts are not so?

     It is because men only go upright, and therefore
nature hath given the lower part corpulency, and hath
taken it away from the upper; and therefore she hath made
the buttock, the thighs, and calf of the legs fleshy.

     Why (as Aristotle doth affirm) are the sensible
powers in the heart, yet if the hinder part of the brain
be hurt the memory payeth for it; if the forepart, the
imagination; if the middle, the cogitative part?

     It is because the brain is appointed by nature to
cool the heat of the heart wherefore it is, that in
divers of its parts it serveth the powers and instruments
of their heat, for every action of the soul doth not
proceed from one measure of heat.


The Problems of Alexander Aphrodiseus.

     Why doth the sun make a man black, and dirt white,
and make wax soft, and dirt hard?

     By reason of the disposition of the substance that
doth suffer. All humours, phlegm excepted, when they are
heated above measure, do seem black about the skin, and
die, being full either of saltpetre or salt liquor; when
the sup hath consumed its dregs and filth, doth become
white again, when the sun hath drawn and stirred up the
humidity of the wax, it is softened; but in dirt the sun
doth consume the humidity which is very much, and so doth
dry it and make it hard.

     Why doth black choler, coming into the paps or to
the shank, work a corrosion, or gnawing, or wasting, and
in those which are melancholy, it doth not work in the
like, although it flies into their brain?

     Because there are many great veins in the paps by
reason of engendering milk. And likewise to the shank, 
because it goeth downwards; but in the brain because it
is above, and also because it hath very small veins,
small store of choler doth ascend, and which hath only
power and force to prick, and not to gnaw and eat.
Moreover, the brain is cold and moist, whereby it is
after a sort contrary to the disposition of black choler,
which doth mortify it. That therefore which is properly
called black choler doth breed an eating and gnawing
canker in the paps, in the shank a bile or sore hard to
be cured, which of eating is called nimades. In the brain
it doth breed a fierce man melancholy; but that which is
not properly black choler, but melancholy humour, causeth
a swelling only, which is like a canker, but doth not
gnaw and eat, and doth also breed a quiet and peaceable
melancholy.

     What is the reason that when we put our finger on
the mouth of a watering-pot the water will not run out of
the bottom, and the finger being taken away, it runneth
presently?

     Because then when the finger is taken away from the
mouth of the pot, the air entering in doth thrust down
the water, which of its own nature doth go downward, and
so goeth out of the bottom. And this is the reason of all
mechanical engines and instruments made by air and water,
as clocks and hour glasses made by water.

     Why doth wine and water given out of the season to
the sick of an ague cause a good distemperance of the
brain; for these two are contrary, for the water is cold
and the wine is hot?

     I say then, that the wine being apt to ascend, doth
burn the brain at the time that it is disturbed and
distempered with the ague. And we see also many which are
in health, if they use much wine, to be scarce well in
their wits. But water doth stop the passages of the body,
by which the spirits (which are the instruments of the
soul) are dissolved, lad so cause thorn to become thick
and gross, and more corrupt and putrid, which breeds the
ague. And oftentimes water being overcome by the ague,
becometh its nourishment; as we see in a smith's forge,
where a little water doth kindle the fire and make it
burn more.

     Why have women and children, and gelded men, shrill
and loud voices?

     Because that through the abundance of humidity their
artery is not stretched wide: and therefore, as a small
flute or pipe giveth a small slender sound, so of the
artery in them that a straight and narrow: for it is the
property of heat to make wide and loosen, but women and
eunuchs are cold.

     Why are children stricken with a planet in summer
time?

     They are sick of a weak and lingering ague and their
eyes  sink hollow in their head, and they become weak and
feeble, and sleep very little; and some of them have a
flux, because children are tender, and do easily suffer,
and have great store of phlegm in the bead, as we have
said; and therefore the phlegm being overmuch heated with
great heats, and also putrefied, doth inflame the ague,
whereupon the gristles of the brain are set on fire, and 
therefore they sleep little; and that fire descending by
the arteries of the heart, and setting on fire the lively
spirits, doth kindle an ague without putrefaction. And
seeing that much choler arises of an ague, thereby it
falleth out that the choler gnaweth and eateth the belly.
It is plain, that the cause of that alteration is in the
brain, because that cooling medicines are applied unto
the bead, and such are good to quench that fire. And some
of ripe years are sick of the same disease, that is, such
is have phlegm and choler heaped up into their head,
which putrefy by the very breathing thereof, and after a
manner, and by the fiery air the spirits are set on fire.

     Why are round ulcers hard to be cured?

     Because they are bred of a sharp choler, which eats
and gnaws, and because it doth run, dropping and gnawing
it makes a round ulcer, for which reason it requires
drying medicines, as physicians assert. Natural
philosophers say, it comes to pass because there is the
beginning where the mischievous imposthume doth begin;
for in a circle there is neither beginning nor end. When
they are burned by the physicians they assume another
kind of shape.

     Why is honey sweet to all men, and yet seeming
bitter to such as have the jaundice?

     Because they have much bitter choler all over their
bodies, but abounds with the tongue, whence it happens
when they eat honey the humours are stirred, and the
taste itself, when it hath found the bitterness of
choler, causes an imagination that the honey is bitter.

     Why have very angry men fiery eyes?

     Because the blood about the heart is fervent, and
the spirit hot, and so (being very subtile and pure) are
carried upwards, and by the eyes (which are clean) they
shine, and have bloody vapours that ascend with them,
which makes the face red, which Homer, not being ignorant
of, says, and his eyes were like a burning flame.

     Why doth water cast upon serpents cause them to fly?

     Because they are cold and dry by nature, having but
little blood, and therefore fly from excessive coldness.
And that they be of this quality is plain, because they
seek for dens and secret places in the earth, as being
warm; and at sun-set shun the air, as being cold; and
again in summer, because the bowels of the earth are
cold, they find out the warmest places.

     Why doth an egg break if it be roasted, and not if
boiled?

     The reason is, when moisture comes near the fire it
heats it too much, and so breeds much wind, which being
pent up in little room, forceth its way out, and so
breaks the shell. The like happens in tubs, or earthen
vessels, when new wine is put in them. And too much
phlegm breaks the shell of an egg in roasting; the which
doth happen in earthen pots too much heated; wherefore
the common people wet an egg when they intend to roast
it. Hot water, through its softness, doth separate its
humidity by little and little, and so dissolves it
through. the thinness and passages that are in the
shells.

     Why do men in the act of carnal copulation in a
manner wink, and find a like alteration in all the other
senses?

     Because they being overcome with the effect of that
pleasure, do comprehend it the better, winking, as it
were, their eyes. They are not lifted, nor do carry the
wind abroad into the air with the senses, whereby they
would discern those corporal affections.

     Why have some medicines of one kind contrary force,
as experience doth teach; mastich doth expel, dissolve,
and so knit; vinegar both cools and heats?

     Because there are some small invisible bodies of
them, not by confusion but by interposition; as sand
moistened doth clog together and seem to be but one body,
though indeed there are many small bodies in sand. Since
this is so, it is not absurd that contrary qualities and
virtues should be hidden in mastich, and nature hath
given the law these bodies.

     Why do our privities swell when we hurt one of our
toes?

     Nature warding for those things which belong to the
body hastens to assist the part grieved: and because she
hath the most profitable and nourishing of ail the
humours, it is requisite when she doth descend, to the
toe with the blood, that those veins be filled which are
about the privy members, called Adness of the Greeks,
which are little sound kernels. Therefore immoderate
constipation doth cause inflammation and standing up, and
the privy member is called Inguem, borrowing its
denomination of the place itself.

     Why doth not nature give birds bladder, or a
receptacle for urine?

     Because they did want much moisture to give the
matter for feathers to grow, and that they consume with
the exercise of flying; neither do they piss at all; and
when they drink they void very much dung.

     Why have children gravel breeding in their bladder,
and old men their kidneys and reins of the kidneys?

     Because children have straight passages in the
kidneys, and an earthy thick humour is thrust with
violence by the urine from the fashion of the moon, even
to the bladder, which hath wide conduits or passages that
give room for the urine and humour, whereof gravel is
engendered to wax thick and seat itself, as the custom of
it is. in old men it is the reverse, or they have wide
passages of the reins, back and kidneys, that the urine
may pass away, and the earthy humour congeal and sink
down; the colour of the gravel shows the humour whereof
the stone comes.

     Why if the stones do congeal and wax hard through
heat (children are hot, and by the same reason it is done
in old men, for there is not go much cold to be granted
as there is in ice or snow, through which extreme cold
the kidneys would perish), yet we use not contrary things
to dissolve coldness, but light things, as parsley,
fennel, and such like?

     They say it falleth out that by excessive and
scorching, the stones do crumble into sand, as in earthen
vessels, which when they are overheated or roasted they
become sand. And by this means it happens that small
stones are voided together with sand in making water.
Sometimes cold drinks thrust out the stone, the kidneys
being stretched, and casting it out by a greater task,
and easing the belly of its burden. Besides, it often
happens that an immoderate heat of the kidneys or of the
reins of the back (through which the stone both grew) is
quenched with coldness.

     Why is the curing of an ulcer or bile in the kidneys
or bladder very hard?

     Because the urine, being sharp, doth ulcerate the
wound, which good and fit medicaments cover the skin.
Ulcers are harder to cure in the bladder than in the
kidneys, because urine stays in the former, but runs away
from the latter.

     What is the reason in bathing vessels the hot water
when it is stirred, seems the hotter to us, almost
burning our bodies?

     Because when we enter those sort of baths the water
itself doth suffer, that is, when the water heats our
bodies it is made colder by us. We have learnt, that
whatever works in generation of corruption, the same
(without all doubt) doth suffer; the water then being in
some sort cooled, doth not heat alike, and we being
accustomed to it, do not feel the heat as we did in the
beginning, because it is diminished. If by stirring the
water more heat is added, which neither hath yet wrought
nor suffered any thing of the body which is in it that
will seem very hot and scalding, in regard that it
suffers by something, and so by degrees loses its heat as
the first did.

     How is it if whatsoever be moved is the better for
it, especially in summer, when the heat of the sun is
most violent?

     This seems a contradiction to the other, for hot
water did seem hotter to us by moving. Therefore it is a
common thing for what is moist and principal in any
thing, either in quantity or quality, to overcome and
change that which is less and weaker; and that which is
strong doth somewhat suffer again in doing. Wherefore the
hot water when it was very hot, sticking to the hot body,
cools and does not retain the same quality. The air then
which doth compass us about being hot in summer, like the
water compassing our bodies, is somewhat heated by us,
who are hot through the season, it heats us as linen
garments do, the which being first cold, and then stir
the air, that air which was before heated by us is driven
away, and another not heated succeeds and seems cold to
us.

     Why do those sores which breed in the ball of the
eye seem white when they have less growing and are cold,
and others do not seem such as grow out of the ball?

     Because through the ball of the eye the sight
proceedeth, the which is bright and clear; therefore in
the white of the eye, when the wound doth make thick that
part of the covering which is like a horn, the spirit of
the sight cannot issue out; hence it comes to pass (much
of it being got together) it makes the wound light and
clear, showing it white; and, because of the quickness of
the sight, the spirit cannot get out, it causes
blindness.

     Why do chaff and straw keep water hot, and snow
cold, which are seemingly contraries?

     Because the nature of chaff wants a manifest
quality; seeing therefore that of their own nature they
can easily be mingled and consumed with that which they
are annexed unto, they easily also take the same nature
unto them, and therefore being put into hot things, they
are easily hot, and do heat again, and keep hot, and
contrary being made cold of the snow, and making the snow
cold, do keep in its coldness. So wax and oil will easily
be consumed, and made one with another thing, and are
also without quality, and do help the quality which is
mingled with them, as being made one with them.

     Why do the stars of heaven seem clearest in the
bright winter time?

     Because the air, either which do compass us, or that
which is highest, is shade thin, and purged with winds
and showers of rain, and by that means our sight doth see
both further and clearer. The like is manifestly seen in
running rivers; for such things as are in them are far
better seen than in the thick standing puddle of water,
where either nothing is seen or confusedly.

     Why have we oftentimes a pain in making water?

     Because that sharp choler issuing out, and prickling
the bladder of the urine, doth provoke and stir up the
whole body to ease that part offended. and to expel the
humour moderately. This doth happen most of all unto
children, bemuse they have moist excrements, by reason of
their often filling.

     Why do nurses rock and move their children when they
would draw them to sleep?

     To the end that the humours being scattered by
moving the brains; but those of more years cannot endure
this.

     Why do some drunkards see double?

     Because the muscles of the sight being more or less
filled, and by the self-same means weak and feeble, do
draw and rest one eye upward, and the other downward, and
by that means the beams do not look that way at once, but
towards divers places and bodies; and therefore each of
the eyes using a private office and duty of seeing doth
cause a double sight.

     Why are boys apt to change their voices about
fourteen years of age?

     Because that then nature doth cause a great and
sudden change of voice: experience proveth this to be
true; for at that time we may see that women's paps do
grow great; to hold and gather milk, and also those
places that are above the hips, in which the young fruit
should remain. Likewise men's breasts and shoulders,
which then can bear great and heavy burdens; also their
stones, in which their seed may increase and abide, and
his privy members, to let out the seed with ease.
Further, all the body is made bigger and dilated, as the
alteration and change of every part doth testify, and the
hardness of the voice and hoarseness; for the rough
artery, the wind-pipe, being made wide in the beginning,
and the exterior and outward part within being unequal to
the throat, the air going out at the unequal and uneven
pipe doth then become unequal and sharp, and after a sort
hoarse, some thing like unto the voice of a goat,
wherefore it has its name called Bronchus. The same doth
also happen to them unto whose rough artery distillation
doth flow; it happens by reason of the drooping humidity
that a light small skin filled unequally causes the
uneven going forth of the spirit and air. Understand that
the wind-pipe of goats is such by reason of the abundance
of humidity. The like doth happen unto all such as nature
hath given a rough artery as unto cranes. After the age
of fourteen they leave off that voice, because the artery
is made wider and reacheth its natural evenness and
quality.

     Why doth oil being drank cause one to vomit, and
especially yellow choler?

     Because that seeing it is light and ascendeth
upwards, it provoketh the nutriment in the stomach, and
lifteth it up, and so the stomach being grieved summoneth
the ejective virtue to vomit, and especially choler,
because that is light, and consisteth of subtle parts,
and therefore it is the sooner carried upward; for when
it is mingled with any moist thing it runneth Into the
highest room.

     Why doth not oil mingle with moist things?

     Because that being pliant, soft, and constipate in
itself it cannot be divided into parts, and so cannot be
mingled, neither if it be put on the earth can it enter
into it.

     Why is water and oil frozen in cold weather, and
wine and vinegar not?

     Because that oil being without all quality, and fit
to be compounded with any thing, is cold quickly, and so
extremely, that it is most cold. Water being cold of
nature, doth easily freeze when it is made colder than
its own nature. Wine being hot and of subtle parts, is
not so soon cold, but vinegar being of most subtle parts,
suffereth no freezing.

     Why do contrary things in quality bring forth the
same effect?

     That which is moist is hardened and abounds alike of
heat and of cold. Snow and liquid doth freeze with cold;
a plaister and gravel in the bladder are made hot with
heat. That is so indeed, but by two divers actions. The
heat doth consume and eat the abundance of moisture; but
the cold stopping and shutting with its overmuch
thickness, doth wring out the filthy humidity, like as a
sponge wrung with the hand doth cast out the water which
it hath in the pores or small passages.

     Why doth a shaking or a quiver seize us oftentimes
when any fearful matter doth chance, as a great noise or
a crack made, the sudden downfall of water, or a great
tree?

     Because that oftentimes the humours being digested
and consumed with time, and made thin and weak, all the
heat vehemently suddenly and sharply flying into the
inward part of the body, consumeth the humours which
causeth the disease. So treacle hath its effect and many
such like, which are hot and dry, whey they are taken
after concoction.

     Why do steel glasses shine so clearly?

     Because they are lined in the inside with white
lead, whose nature is shining, that which being put to
the glass, which is also shining, doth shine much more;
and casting its beams through the passages of the glass,
doth double that which is in the superficial parts of the
glass, and without the body of the glass, and by that
means the glass is very shining and clear.

     Why do we see ourselves in glasses and clear water?

     Because the quality of the sight passing into the
bright bodies by reflection, doth return again by the
beam of the eyes, as the image of him who looked on it.
That qualities do go forth and pass from the face, as it
is not absurd, they do shew which remain near unto trees,
because they are wont to look green, for the green
quality of green leaves passeth to the face of itself;
likewise going unto the running water doth make it shew
green.

     Why do hard dense hollow and high places send back
the likeness and sound of the voice?

     Because that in such places also by reflection do
return back the image of a sound, for the voice doth beat
the air, and the air the place, which the more it is
beaten the more it doth bear and therefore doth cause the
more vehement sound of the voice; moist places, and as it
were soft, yielding to the stroke, and dissolving it,
give no sound again; for according to the quality and
quantity of the stroke, the quality and quantity of voice
is given, which is called an echo. Some do idly fable
that she is a goddess: some say that Pan was in love with
her, which without doubt is false. He was some wise man
who did first desire to search out the cause of that
voice; and as they which love, and cannot enjoy their
love, are grieved, so in like manner was he very sorry
until be found out the solution of that cause: as
Endymion also, who first found out the course of the
moon, watching all night, and observing her course, and
searching her motion, did sleep in the daytime, and
therefore they do fable that he was beloved of her and
that she came to him when he was asleep, because she did
give to the philosopher the solution of the course of
herself. They say also that he was a shepherd, because
that in the desert and high places he did mark the course
of the moon. And they gave him also the pipe, because
that the high places are blown; with wind, or else
because he sought out the consonancy of figures.
Prometheus also being a wise man, sought the cause of the
star, which is called the eagle in the firmament, his
nature and place; and when he was as it were wasted with
the desire of learning, then at the last ho rested, when
Hercules did resolve unto him all doubts with his wisdom.

     What is the reason that if you cast a stone into a
standing water that is on the utmost parts of the earth
it makes many circles, and not if the water be deep in
the earth?

     Because that the stone with the vehemence of the
cast doth pursue and follow the water from every part of
it, until the stone come to the bottom; but if there he a
very great vehemency in the throw, the circle is the
greater, the stone going down unto the earth causeth many
circles. For first of all it doth drive the overmost and
superficial parts of the water into many parts, and so
going down always to the bottom, again dividing the
water, it maketh into another circle, and this done
successively until the stone resteth, and because the
vehemency of the stone is slackened still as it goes down
of necessity the last circle is less than the first,
because that with the stone and also with the body the
water is divided.

     Why do some think that laughter proceeds from the
spleen, affirming that it is not like that they laugh as
much, whose spleen is corrupted, as they whose spleen is
sound, but say that such are very sad?

     Truly, I think that the cause of laughter is
accidental, and not properly the spleen, for if it be
sound and perfect it doth draw from the liver melancholy
humours, whereof it proceedeth, that when the pure blood
without any dregs dolt go through the whole body, and
also in the brain, it doth delight both nature and mind,
and doth make men merry like unto wine, and bring them to
a quietness and tranquillity, and so that of laughter is
moved.

     Why do not males bring forth young ones?

     Because they proceed of a divers kind of beasts, and
so then the mixture of seed differing of quality and
quantity, begetting a certain other thing besides that
which is first, doth mar and abolish the nature of those
things which first were, as the mingling of white and
black, abolishing the colour of excrements, breedeth
another colour which is dark and dun, which is none at
all of the extreme; therefore the engendering quality is
abolished, and the aptness of receiving form.

     Why are such as are deaf by nature dumb?
Because they cannot speak and express that which they
never heard; some physicians do say, that there is one
knitting and uniting of sinews belonging to the like
disposition. But such as are dumb by an accident are not
deaf at all for then there ariseth a local passion.

     Why do not swine cry when they are carried with
their snouts upwards?

     Because that above all other beasts they bend more
than others to the earth. They delight in filth, and that
they seek, and therefore in the sudden change of their
face they be as it were strangers, and being amazed with
so much light, do keep that silence; some say the
windpipe doth close together by reason of the straitness
of it.

     Why do swine delight in dirt?

     As the physicians do say, they are naturally
delighted with it, because they have a great liver, in
which desire is, as Aristotle saith, the wideness of
their snout is the cause, for he hath smelling which doth
dissolve itself, and as it were strive with stench.

     Why doth itching arise when an ulcer doth wax whole
and phlegm cease?

     Because the part which is healed and made sound doth
pursue  the relic of the humours which remaineth there
against nature, and which was the cause of the bile, and
so going out through the skin and dissolving itself, doth
originally cause the itch.

     Why are those diseases and accidents longest and
most grievous which do molest one eye and not both?

     For two reasons: first, because a running fluxion is
heaped up at one eye only, for whatsoever is divided into
many, is weaker than when entire, and of a lesser force;
secondly, because when the whole eye doth make any
motion, it often obliges the ailing eye to move too, and
the help for any diseased part consists in quietude.

     How comes a man to sneeze oftener and more
vehemently than a beast?

      Because he uses more meats and drinks, and of more
different  sorts, and that more than requisite, the which
when he cannot digest as he would, he doth gather
together much air and spirit, by reason of much humidity,
the spirits being then very subtle, ascending into the
head, often forces a man to void it, and so provokes
sneezing. The noise caused thereby proceeds from a
vehement spirit or breath passing through the conduits of
the nostrils, as belching does by the stomach, or farting
by the fundament, the voice by the throat, and a sound by
the ears.

     How comes the hair and nails of dead people to grow?

     Because the flesh rotting, withering, and falling
away, that which was hidden about the root of the hair
doth now appear, and causes an imagination that the hair
doth grow. Some say it grows indeed, because the dead
carcasses are dissolved in the beginning to many
excrements and superfluities, by reason of the
putrefaction which comes to them. Those going out at the
uppermost parts of the body by some passages do increase
the growth of the hair.

     Why do not the hair of the feet presently grow grey?

     For the same reason, because that through great
motion they disperse and dissolve the superfluous phlegm
that breeds greyness. The hair of the secrets does grow
very late because of the heat of that place, and because
that in carnal copulation it does dissolve the phlegm
also.

     Why do many beasts wag their tails when they see
their friends, and a lion and a bull beat their sides
when they are angry?

     Because they have the marrow of their backs reaching
to the tail, which have the force of motion in it, the
imagination acknowledges that which is known to them as
it were with the hand (as happen to men) doth force them
to mote their tail. This doth manifestly show some secret
force to be within them, which doth acknowledge what they
ought. In the anger of lions and bulls nature doth
consent to the mind, and causeth it to be greatly moved,
as men do sometimes when they are angry, beating their
hands on other parts; when the mind cannot be revenged on
that which doth hurt, it presently seeks out some other 
solace, and cures the malady with a stroke or blow.

     Why, if you put hot burnt barley upon a horse's
sore, is the hair which grows upon the sore not white
like the other hair?

     Because it hath the force of expelling, and doth
wipe away and dissolve the excrements of phlegm, as
likewise all unprofitable matter that is gathered
together through the weakness of the parts, or crudity of
the sore.

     Why doth hair never grow on an ulcer or a boil?

     The reason is, a man hath a thick skin, as is seen
by the thickness of the hair, and since the scar is
thicker than the skin itself, it stops the passages from
whence the hair should grow Horses have thinner skins, as
is plain by the thick hair; therefore all passages are
not stopped in their wounds and sores, and after the
excrements which were gathered together have broke a
passage through those small pores the hair doth grow.

     What is the reason that such as are bitten with a
snake, if they are thirsty, quench it by drinking of
treacle, which is hot and dry?

     I say then, it doth not quench thirst solely by its
own quality, but by some mutual sympathy and consent, and
natural reason. It is a kind of counter poison, and a
preservative too, being composed of divers sorts of herbs
that have some kind of agreement with all the parts o the
body, as dictamnum, dittanger or ginger, hath a
proportionable conservative of the heart, agrimony or
liverwort with the liver, stonewort or finger fern with
the spleen, parsley with the mouth of the belly, hyssop
with the lungs, elecampane with the reins of the back,
rue with the neck, bitterwort the brain, and filer
montanum with the bladder. Every one of these drawn as it
were with the sweetness of honey, doth draw that which is
best for his safety; among all of these the blood of some
vipers is mingled, which hath a certain natural
disaffection, which we call antiparium, a contrary of all
natural qualities against every venomous beast and
corruptible creature. These being distributed into every
part, they suffer nothing to work that effect which doth
threaten corruption, for they do resist like awful
soldiers who have taken arms for the defence of their
country.

     Why is fortune painted with a double forehead, one
side bald and the other hairy?

     The baldness signifies adversity, and hairiness,
prosperity, which we enjoy when it please her.

     Why have some commended flattery?

     Because flattery setteth forth before our eyes what
we ought to be, though not what we be.

     Wherefore should virtue be painted girded?

     To show that virtuous men should not be slothful but
diligent, and always in action.

     Why did the ancients say it was better to fall into
the hands of a raven than a flatterer?

     Because ravens don't eat us till we be dead, but
flatterers devour us alive.

     Why have choleric men beards before others?

     Because they are hot, and their pores large and
wide.

     How comes it that such as have the hiccup do ease
themselves by holding their breath?

     The breath retained doth heat the interior parts of
the body, and the hiccup proceeds from nothing but cold.

     How comes it that old men remember well that which
they have seen and done in their youth, and forget such
things as they see and do in their old age?

     Things learnt in youth have taken root and habitude
in the person, but those learnt in age are forgotten,
because the senses an weakened in them.

     What kind of covetousness is best?

     That of time when it is employed as it ought to be.

     Why is our life compared to a stage play?

     Because the dishonest do occupy the place of the
honest, and the worst sort The room of the good.

     Why do dolphins, when they appear above the water,
denote some storm or tempest approaching?

     Because that at the beginning of a tempest there do
arise from the bottom of the sea certain hot exhalations
and vapours which heat the dolphins, causing them to rise
up and for cold.

     How comes things more quiet in the night than in the
day?

     The motion of the air, and the coldness of the night
is the muse thereof, which coldness continues and hinders
the motions.

     How comes the Romans to call Fabius Maximus the
target of the people and Marcellus the sword?

     Because the one adapted himself to the service of
the commonwealth, and the other was very eager to revenge
the injuries of his country; and yet they were in the
senate joined together, because the gravity of the one
would moderate the courage and boldness of the other.

     Why does the shining of the moon hurt the head?

     Because it moves the humours of the brain and cannot
afterwards resolve them.

     If water do not nourish, why do men drink it?

     Water causes the nutriment to spread through the
body.

     Why is sneezing good?

     It purgeth the brain, as milk is purged by the
cough.

     What is the seat of the affection of the body?

     Joy dwelleth in the spleen, anger in the gall, fear
in the heart, and lechery in the liver.

     Why is hot water lighter than cold?

     Because boiling water hath less ventosity and is
more light and subtle, the earthy and heavy substance
being separated from it.

     How comes marsh and pond water evil?

     By reason they are phlegmatic, and do corrupt in
summer time, the fineness of water is turned into
vapours, and the earthiness doth remain.

     Why be studious and learned men soonest bald?

     It proceeds from a weakness of the spirits, or
because warmth of digestion causes phlegm to abound in
them.

     Why doth too much watching make the brain feeble?

     Because it increaseth choler, which dries and
extenuates the body.

     How comes steel glasses better for the sight than
others?

     Steel is hard and doth present unto us more
substantially the air that receiveth the light.

     How doth love show its greatest force by making the
fool to become wise, or the wise become a fool?

     In attributing wisdom to him that hath it not: for
it is harder to build than to pull down; and ordinary
love end folly are but an alteration of the mind.

     How comes too much labour bad for the sight?

     Because it dries the blood too much.

     Why is goat's milk counted best for the stomach?

     Because it is thick, not slimy, and they feed upon
boughs and wood rather than grass.

     Why do grief or vexation bring grey hairs?

     Because it dries, and age is nothing else.

     How comes he the most merry that hath the thickest
blood?

     The blood which is fat and thick makes the spirits
firm and constant, wherein consists the force of all
creatures.

     In your opinion, which is hardest: to obtain the
love of a person, or to keep it when obtained?

     To keep it, by reason of the inconstancy of man, who
is quickly angry, and soon weary of a thing; hard: be
got:, and slippery to keep.

     Why do serpents shun the herb rue?

     Because they are cold, dry, and full of sinews, but
the herb rue is of a contrary nature.

     How comes a capon better to eat than a cock?

     The capon loses not its moisture, because he does
not tread the hens, and therefore is better.

     Why do we smell a thing less in the winter than in
summer?

     Because the air is thick, and less moveable.

     How comes hair to burn so quickly as it does?

     Because the hair is dry and cold.

     Why is love compared to a labyrinth?

     Because the entry and coming in is easy, and the
going out impossible, or very hard.


ARISTOTLE'S MASTERPIECE -- DISPLAYING THE SECRETS OF
NATURE, RELATING TO PHYSIOGNOMY.

CHAPTER I.
Of Physiognomy, showing what it is, and from whence it is
derived.

     PHYSIOGNOMY is an ingenious science, or knowledge of
nature, by which the inclination and dispositions of
every creature are understood: and because some of the
members are uncompounded, and entire of themselves, as
the tongue, the heart, etc.; and some are of a mixed
nature, as the eyes, the nose, and others; we therefore
say that there are many signs which agree and live
together, which inform a wise man how to make his
judgment before he be too rash to deliver it to the
world.

     Nor is it to be esteemed a foolish or idle art,
seeing it is derived from the superior bodies: for there
is no part of the face of a man but what is under the
peculiar influence or government not only of the seven
planets, but also of the twelve signs of the Zodiac: and
the disposition, vices, virtues, and fatality, either of
a man or woman, are plainly foretold, if the person
pretending to the knowledge thereof be an artist, which,
that my reader may hereby attain to, I shall set these
things in a clearer light.

     The reader should remember that the forehead is
governed by Mars: the right eye is under the dominion of
Sol: the left eye is ruled by the moon, or Luna: the
right ear is the care of Jupiter: the left of Saturn: the
rule of the nose is claimed by Venus, which, by the way,
is one reason that in all unlawful venereal encounters,
the nose is too subject to bear the scars which are
gotten in those wars; and the nimble Mercury, the
significator of eloquence, claims the dominion of the
mouth, and that very justly.

     Thus have the seven planets divided the face among
them, but not with so absolute a sway, but that the
twelve signs of the  Zodiac do also come in for a part:
And therefore the sign of Cancer presides in the
uppermost part of the forehead, and Leo attends upon the
right eyebrow, as Sagittarius does upon the right eye and
Libra upon the right ear; upon the left eye and eyebrow
you will find Aquarius and Gemini, and Aries taking care
of the left ear; Taurus rules in the middle of the
forehead, and Capricorn the chin: Scorpio takes upon him
the protection of the nose; Virgo claims precedence of
the right cheek, and Pisces of the left. And thus the
face of man is cantoned out amongst the Signs and
Planets; which being carefully attended to, will
sufficiently inform the artists how to pass a judgment.
For according to the sign or planet ruling, so also is
the judgment to be of the part ruled, which all those
that have understanding know easily how to apply.
<illustration: Phrenological diagram> arist13.gif

     In the judgment that is to be made from Physiognomy
there is a great difference betwixt a man and a woman;
the reason is, because, in respect of the whole
composition, men more fully comprehend it than women do,
as may evidently appear by the manner and method we shall
give in the following section. Wherefore the judgments
which we shall pass in every chapter, do properly concern
a man, as comprehending the whole Species, and but
improperly the woman as being but a part thereof, and
derived from the man; and therefore whoever is called to
give judgment on such and such a face ought to be wary
about all the lines and marks that belong to it; respect
being also paid to the sex: for when we behold a man
whose face is like unto a woman's, and we pass a judgment
upon it, having diligently observed it, and not on the
face only but on other parts of the body, as his hands,
etc. In like manner we also behold the face of a woman,
who in respect of her flesh and blood is like unto a man,
and in the disposure also of the greater parts of her
body. But does physiognomy give the same judgment on her
as it does of a man that is like unto her? By no means,
but far otherwise; in regard that the conception of the
woman is much different from that of a man, even in those
respects which are said to be common. Now, in those
common respects, two parts are attributed to a man, a
third part to a  woman.

     Wherefore, it being our intention to give you an
exact account according to the rule of physiognomy, of
all and every part of the members of the body, we will
begun with the head, as it hath relation only to man and
woman, and not any other creature, that the work may be
more obvious to every reader.


CHAPTER II.
Of the Judgment of Physiognomy.

     HAIR that hangs down without curling, if it be of a
fair complexion, thin, and soft withal, signifies a man
to be naturally fainthearted, and of a weak body but of a
quiet and harmless disposition. Hair that is big, and
thick, and short withal, denotes a man to be of a strong
constitution, secure, and deceitful, and for the most
pert unquiet, and vain, lusting after beauty, and more
foolish than wise, though fortune may favour him. He
whose hair is partly curled and partly hanging down, is
commonly a wise or a very great fool, or else as very a
knave as he is a fool. He whose hair groweth thick on his
temples and his brow, one may at the first sight
certainly conclude that such a man is by nature simple,
vain, luxurious, lustful, credulous, clownish in his
speech and conversation, and dull in his apprehension. He
whose hair not only curls very much, but busheth out, and
stands on end; if the hair be white, or of yellowish
colour, he is by nature proud and bold, dull of
apprehension, soon angry, a lover of venery, and given to
lying, malicious and ready to do any mischief. He whose
hair rises in the corners of his temples, and is gross
and rough withal, is a man highly conceited of himself,
inclined to malice, but cunningly conceals it, is very
courtly, and a lover of new fashions. He who hath much
hair, that is to say whose hair is thick all over his
head, is naturally vain and very luxurious, of a good
digestion, easy of belief, and slow of performance, of a
weak memory, and for the most part unfortunate. He whose
hair is of reddish complexion, is for the most part, if
not always, proud, deceitful, detracting, venerous, and
full of envy. He whose hair is extraordinarily fair, is
for the most part a man fit for all praiseworthy
enterprizes, a lover of honours, and much more inclined
to do good than evil; laborious and careful to perform
whatsoever is committed to his care, secret in carrying
on any business, and fortunate. Hair of a yellowish
colour shows a man to be good conditioned, and willing to
do any thing, fearful, shamefaced, and weak of body, but
strong in the abilities of the mind, and more apt to
remember than revenge an injury. He whose hair is of a
brownish colour, and curleth not too much nor too little,
is a well disposed man, inclined to that which is good, a
lover of peace, cleanliness, and good manners. He whose
hair turns grey or hoary in the time of his youth, is
generally given to women, vain, false, unstable, and
talkative. Not, that whatsoever signification the hair
has in men it has the same in women also.

Thus does wise Nature make our very hair
Show all the passions that within us are;
If to the bottle we are most inclin'd,
Or if we fancy most the female kind:
If into virtue's path our minds we bend,
Or if to vicious ways our footsteps tend,
A skilful artist can unfold the same,
Awl from our hair a certain judgment frame:
But since our perriwigs are come in fashion,
No room is left for such an observation.

     The forehead that riseth in a round, signifies a man
liberally merry, of a good understanding, and generally
inclined to virtue. He whose forehead is fleshy, and the
bone of the brow jutting out, and without wrinkles, is a
man much inclined to suits of law, contentious, vain,
deceitful, and addicted to follow ill courses. He whose
forehead is very low and little is of a good
understanding, magnanimous, but extremely bold and
confident, and a great pretender to love and honour. He
whose forehead seems sharp, and pointing up in the
corners of his temple, that the bone seem m put forth a
little, is a man naturally weak and fickle, and weak in
his intellectuals. He whose brow upon the temples is full
of flesh is a man of a great spirit, proud, watchful, and
of a gross understanding. He whose brow is full of
wrinkles, and hath as it were a seam coming down the
middle of his forehead, so that a man may think he hath
two foreheads, is one that is of a great spirit, a great
wit, void of deceit, and yet of a hard fortune. He who
has a full large forehead, and a little round withal,
destitute of hair, or at least that has little on it, is
bold, malicious, high spirited, full of choler, and apt
to transgress beyond bounds, and yet of a good wit, and
very apprehensive. He whose forehead is long and high,
and jutting forth, and whose face is figured, almost
sharp and picked towards the chin, is one reasonably
honest, but weak and simple, and of a hard fortune.

Who views men well may on their vices hit,
For some men's crimes are in their foreheads writ;
But the resolved man outbraves his fate,
And will be good although unfortunate.

     Those eye-brows that are much arched, whether in man
or woman, and which by frequent motion elevate
themselves, show the person to be proud, high-spirited,
vain-glorious, bold and threatening; a lover of beauty,
and indifferently inclined to either good or evil. He
whose eye-lids bend downwards when he speaks to another
man, or when he looks upon him, and who has a kind of
skulking look, is by nature a penurious wretch, close in
all his actions, of a very few words, but full of malice 
in his heart. He whose eye-brows are thick, and have but
little hair upon them, is but weak in his intellectuals,
and too credulous, very sincere, sociable, and desirous
of good company. He whose eye-brows are folded, and the
hair thick, and bending downwards, is one that is
clownish and unlearned, heavy, suspicious, miserable,
envious, and one that will cheat and cozen you if he can,
and is only to be kept honest by good looking to. He
whose eye-brow hath but short hair and of a whitish
colour, is fearful, and very easy of belief, and apt to
undertake any thing. Those on the other side whose eye-
brows are black, and the hair of them but thin, will do
nothing without great consideration, and are bold and
confident of the performance of what they undertake;
neither are they apt to believe anything without reason
for so doing.

Thus by the eye-brows women's minds we know,
Whether they're white or black, or quick or slow;
And whether they be cured or he kind,
By looking in their eyebrows we may find.

     If the space between the eye-brows be of more than
ordinary distance, it shows the person to be hard-
hearted, envious, close and cunning, apprehensive, greedy
of novelties, of a vain fortune, addicted to cruelty more
than love. But those men whose eyebrows are at a lesser
distance from each other, are for the most part of a dull
understanding; yet subtile enough in their dealings, and
of an uncommon boldness, which is often attended with a
great felicity; but that which is most commendable in
them is, that they are most sure and constant in their
friendship.

     Great and full eyes in either man or woman, shew the
person to be for the most part slothful, bold, envious, a
bad concealer of secrets, miserable, vain, given to
lying, and yet of a bad memory, slow in invention, weak
in his intellectuals, and yet very much conceited of the
little knack of wisdom he thinks himself master of. He
wise eyes are hollow in his head, and therefore discerns
excellently well at a great distance, is one that is
suspicious, malicious, furious, perverse in his
conversation, of an extraordinary memory, bold, cruel,
and false, both in words and deeds, threatening, vicious,
luxurious proud, envious, and treacherous: But he whose
eyes are as it were starting out of his head, is a
simple, foolish person, shameless, very senile, and easy
to be persuaded either to vice or virtue. He who looks
studiously and acutely with his eyes and eye-lids
downwards, denotes thereby to be of a malicious nature,
very treacherous, false, unfaithful, envious, miserable,
impious toward God, and dishonest towards men. He whose
eyes are small and conveniently round, is bashful and
weak, very credulous, liberal to others and even in his
conversation. He whose eyes look asquint, is thereby
denoted to be a deceitful person, unjust, envious,
furious, a great liar, and as the effect of all this,
miserable. He who hath a wandering eye, and which is
rolling up and dawn, is for the most part a vain, simple,
deceitful man, lustful, treacherous, or high minded, an
admirer of the fair sex, and one easy to be persuaded to
virtue or vice. He or she whose eyes are twinkling, and
which move forward or backward, show the person to be
luxurious, unfaithful and treacherous, presumptuous, and
hard to believe any thing that is spoken. If a person has
any greenness mingled in the white of his eyes, such is
commonly silly, and often very false, vain and deceitful,
unkind to his friends, a great concealer of his own
secrets, and very choleric. Those whose eyes are every
way rolling up and down, or they who seldom move their
eyes, and when they do, do as it were draw their eyes
inwardly, and accurately fasten them upon some object,
such are by their inclinations very malicious, vain
glorious, slothful, unfaithful, envious, false and
contentious. They whose eyes are addicted to blood-shot,
are naturally choleric, proud, disdainful, cruel without
shame, perfidious, and much inclined to superstition.
They that have eyes like those of oxen, are persons of
good nutriment, but a weak memory, are dull of
understanding, and silly in their conversation. But they
whose eyes are neither too little nor big, and inclined
to a black, do signify a man mild, peaceable, honest,
witty, and of a good understanding: and one that when
need requires, will be serviceable to his friends.

Thus from the eyes we several things may see,
By nature's art of physiognomy;
That no man scarce can make a look astray,
But we thereby some secret symptoms may
Discern of his intention, and foresee
Unto which path his steps directed be;
And this may teach us goodness more to prize,
For where one's good there's twenty otherwise.

     A long and thin nose denotes a man bold, furious,
angry, vain, easy to be persuaded either to good or evil,
weak and credulous. A long nose and extended, the tip of
it bending downwards shows the person to be wise,
discreet, secret and officious, honest and faithful, and
one who will not be over-reached in bargaining. A bottle
nose is what denote a man to be impetuous in the
obtaining of has desires; also vain, false, luxurious,
weak, and an uncertain man, apt to believe, and easy to
be persuaded. A nose broad in the middle, and less
towards the end, denotes a vain talkative person, a liar,
and one of hard fortune. He who hath a long and great
nose is an admirer of the fair sex, and well accomplished
for the wars of Venus, but ignorant of the knowledge of
any thing that's good; extremely addicted to vice;
assiduous in the obtaining what he desires, and very
secret in the prosecution of it; and though very
ignorant, would fain be thought very knowing.

     A nose very sharp on the top of it, and neither too
long nor too short, too thick nor too thin, denotes the
person, if a man, to be of a fretful disposition, always
pining and peevish; and if a woman, a scold, or
contentious, wedded to her own humours; of a morose and
dogged carriage, and if married, a plague to her husband.
A nose very round at the end of it, and having but little
nostrils, shows the person to be munificent and liberal,
true to his trust, but withal very proud, credulous and
vain. A nose very long and thin at the end of it and
something round withal, signifies one bold in his
discourse, honest in his dealings, patient in receiving,
and slow in offering injuries, but yet privately
malicious. He whose nose is naturally more red than any
other part of his face, is thereby denoted to be
covetous, impious, luxurious, and an enemy to goodness. A
nose that turns up again, and is long and full on the tip
of it, shows the person that has it to be bold, proud,
covetous, envious, luxurious, a liar and deceiver,
vainglorious, unfortunate and contentious. He whose nose
riseth high in the middle is prudent and politic, and of
great courage, honourable in his actions, and true to his
word. A nose big at the end shows a person to be of
peaceable disposition, industrious and faithful, and of a
good understanding. A very wide nose, with wide nostrils,
denotes a man dull of apprehension, and inclined more to
simplicity than wisdom, and withal contentious, vain
glorious, and a liar.

Thus from the nose our physiognomist
Can smell men's inclinations if he list;
And from its colour and its make
Of vice and virtue a survey can make.

     When the nostrils are close and thin, they denote a
man to have but little testicles, and to be very desirous
of the enjoyment of women, but modest in his
conversation. But he whose nostrils are great and wide,
is usually well hung and lustful; but withal of an
envious, bold and treacherous disposition; and though
dull of understanding, yet confident enough.

Thus those who chiefly mind the brutal part
May learn to choose a husband by this art.

     A great and wide mouth shows a man to be bold,
warlike, shameless, and stout, a great liar, and as great
a talker, and also a great eater; but as to his
intellectuals he is very dull, being for the most part
very simple. A little mouth shows the person to he of a
quick and pacific temper, somewhat fearful, but faithful,
secret, modest, bountiful, and but a little eater. He
whose mouth smells of a bad breath is one of a corrupted
liver or lungs, is oftentimes vain, wanton, deceitful, or
indifferent intellects, covetous and a promise breaker.
He that has a sweet breath is the contrary.

Thus from the mouth itself we likewise see
What signs of good and bad may gather'd be;
For let the wind blow east, west, north or south,
Both good and bad proceed out of the mouth.

     The lips, when they are very big and blubbering,
show a person to be credulous, foolish, dull, and stupid,
and apt to be enticed to anything. Lips of a different
size denote a person to be discreet, secret In all
things, judicious and of a good wit, but somewhat hasty.
To have lips well coloured and more thin than thick,
shows a person to be good humoured in all things, and
more easily to be persuaded to good than evil. To have
one lip bigger than the other shows variety of fortunes,
and denotes the party to be of a dull sluggish temper,
and but of a very different understanding, as being much
addicted to folly.

The lips they so much dote on for a kiss
Oft tell fond lovers when they do amiss.

     When the teeth are small, and but weak in performing
the office, and especially if they are short and few,
though they show the person to be of a weak constitution,
yet they denote him to be of a meek disposition, honest,
faithful, and secret in whatsoever he is entrusted with.
To have some teeth longer and shorter than others,
denotes a person to be of a good apprehension but bold,
disdainful, envious, and proud. To have teeth very long,
and showing, and thin, denotes the person to be envious,
gluttonous, bold, shameless unfaithful, and suspicious.
When the teeth look very brown or yellowish, whether they
be long or short, is shows the person to be of a
suspicious temper, envious, deceitful, and turbulent. To
have teeth strong, and close together, shows the person
to be of a long life, a desirer of novelties, and things
that are fair and beautiful, but of a high spirit, and
one that will have his humour in all things; he loves to
hear news, and afterwards to repeat it, and is apt to
entertain any thing to his behalf. To have teeth thin and
weak shows a weak, feeble man, and one of short life, and
of a weak apprehension, but chaste, shamefaced,
tractable, and honest,

Thus from the teeth the learned can pretend
Whether man's steps to vice or virtue bend.

     A tongue too swift in speech shows a man to be
downright foolish, or at best but a very vain wit. A
stammering tongue, or one that stumbles in the mouth,
signifies a man of a weak understanding, and of a
wavering mind, quickly in rage, and soon pacified.

     A very thick and rough tongue denotes a man to be
apprehensive, subtile, and full of compliments, yet vain
and deceitful, treacherous, and prone to impiety. A thin
tongue shows a man of wisdom and sound judgment, very
ingenious and of an affable disposition, yet sometimes
timorous and too credulous.

No wonder 'tis that from men's speech we see
Whether they wise or whether foolish be:
But from a silent tongue our authors tell
The secret passions that within men dwell.


     A great and full voice in either sex shows them to
be of a great spirit, confident, proud and wilful. A
faint and weak voice, attended with but little breath,
shows a person to be of a good understanding, a nimble
fancy, a little eater but weak of body, and of a timorous
disposition. A loud and shrill voice which sounds
clearly, denotes a person provident, sagacious, true, and
ingenious, but withal capricious, vain-glorious and too
credulous. A strong voice when a man sings, denotes him
to be of a strong constitution, and a good understanding,
neither too penurious, nor too prodigal, also ingenious,
and an admirer of the fair sex. A weak and trembling
voice shows the owner of it to be envious, suspicious,
slow in business, feeble and fearful. A loud, shrill, and
unpleasant voice signifies one bold and valiant, but
quarrelsome and injurious, and altogether wedded to his
own humours, and governed  by, his own counsels. A rough
and hoarse voice, whether in speaking or singing,
declares one to be a dull and heavy persona of much guts
and brains. A full and yet mild voice and pleasing to the
hearer, shows the person to be of a quiet and peaceable
disposition (which is a great virtue, and rare to be
found in woman) and also very thrifty and secret, not
prone to anger, but of a yielding temper. A voice
beginning low, or in the bass, and ending in the treble,
denotes a person to be violent, angry, bold, secure.

Thus by our voice 'tis to an artist known
Unto what virtue or what vice we're prone;
And his that will of a good wife make choice
May choose her by observing of her voice.

     A thick and full chin abounding with too much flesh
shows a man inclined to peace, honest and true to his
trust, but slow in invention, and easy to be drawn either
to good or evil. A peeked chin, and reasonably full of
flesh, shows a person to be of a good understanding, a
high spirit, and laudable conversation. A double chin
shows a peaceable disposition, but dull of apprehension,
vain, credulous, a great supplanter, and secret in all
his actions. A crooked chin bending upwards and peeked
for want of flesh, is by the rule of physiognomy
according to nature a wry bad man, being proud, impudent,
envious, threatening, deceitful, prone to anger and
treachery, and a great thief.

Thus from the forehead to the chin we've shown
How mankind's inclinations may be known;
From which th' observing reader must find
We're more to evil than to good inclin'd.

     The hair of young men usually begins to grow down
upon their chin at 15 years of age, and sometimes sooner.
These hairs proceed from the superfluity of heat; the
fumes whereof ascend to their chins, like smoke to the
funnel of a chimney; and because it can not find any open
passage by which it may ascend higher, it vents itself
forth in the hairs, which are called the beard. There are
very few or almost no women at all that have hair on
their cheeks: and the reason is, those humours which
cause hair to grow on the cheeks of a man are by a woman
evacuated in their monthly courses which they have, more
or less, according to the heat or coldness of their
constitutions, and the age and motion of the moon, of
which we have spoken at large in the first part of this
book. Yet some times women of a hot constitution have
hair to be seen on their cheeks, but more commonly on
their lips, or near unto their mouths where the heat most
aboundeth. And where this happens such women are much
addicted to the company of men, and of a strong and manly
constitution. A woman who hath little hair on her 
cheeks, or about her mouth and lips, is of a good
complexion, weak constitution, shamefaced, mild, and
obedient; whereas a woman of a more hot complexion is
quite otherwise. But in a man a beard well composed and
thick of hair, signifies a man of a good nature, honest,
loving, sociable, and full of humanity: on the contrary,
he that hath but little beard, is for the most part
proud, pining, peevish, and unsociable. They who have no
beards have always shrill and strange kind of squeaking
voices, and are of a weak constitution, which is apparent
in the case of eunuchs, who, after they are deprived of
their virility, are transformed from the nature of men
into the condition of women.

Of men and women's beards I might say more,
But prudence bide me this discourse give o'er,

     Great and thick ears are certain signs of a foolish
person, or a bad memory and worse understanding. But
small and thin ears show a person to be of good wit,
grave, secret, thrifty, modest, resolute, of a good
memory, and one willing to serve his friend. He whose
ears are longer than ordinary, is thereby signified to be
a bold man, uncivil vain, foolish, serviceable to another
more than himself, and a man of small industry, but of a
great stomach.

Who his just praise unwillingly does bear,
Shows a good life as well as a good ear.

     A face apt to sweat on every motion, shows the
person to be of a hot constitution, vain and luxurious,
of a good stomach, but of a bad understanding, and a
worse conversation. A very fleshy face shows the person
to be of a fearful disposition, but a merry heart, and
withal bountiful and discreet, easy to be entreated, and
apt to believe every thing. A lean face, by the rules of
physiognomy, denotes the person to be of a good
understanding, but somewhat capricious and disdainful in
his conversation. A little and round  face full of
carbuncles shows a man to be a great drinker of wine,
vain, daring, and soon intoxicated. A face red or high
coloured, shows a man to be much inclined to choler, and
one that will be soon angry, and not easily pacified. A
long and lean face shows a man to be both bold in speech
and action, but withal foolish, quarrelsome, proud,
injurious, and deceitful. A face every way of a due
proportion denotes an ingenious person, one fit for any
thing, and very much inclined to what is good. One of a
broad full fat face is, by the rules of physiognomy, of a
dull lumpish heavy constitution, and that for one virtue
hath three vices. A plain flat face without any rising
shows a person to be very wise, loving, and courtly in
his carriage, faithful to his friend, and patient in
adversity. A face sinking down a little, with crosses in
it, inclining to leanness, denotes a person to be very
laborious, but envious, deceitful, false, quarrelsome,
vain, and silly, of a dull and clownish behaviour. A face
of a handsome proportion, and more inclining to fat than
lean, shows a person just in his actions, true to his
word, civil and respectful in his behaviour, of an
indifferent understanding, and of extraordinary memory. A
crooked face, long and lean, denotes a man endued with as
bad qualities as the face is with ill features. A face
broad about the brows, and sharper and less as it grows
towards the chin, shows a man simple and foolish in
managing his affairs, vain in his discourse, envious in
his nature, deceitful, quarrelsome, and rude in his
conversation. A face well coloured, full of good
features, and of an exact symmetry, and a just proportion
in all its parts, and which is delightful to look upon,
is commonly the index of a fairer mind, and shows a
person to be well disposed: but withal declares that
virtue is not so impregnably seated there, but that by
strong temptations (especially of the fair sex) it may be
supplanted and overcome by vice. A pale complexion shows
the person not only to be fickle, but very malicious,
treacherous, false, proud, presumptuous, and extremely
unfaithful. A face well coloured shows the person to be
of a praiseworthy disposition, and a sound complexion,
easy of belief, and respectful to his friend, ready to do
a courtesy, and very  easy to be drawn to any thing.

Thus physiognomy readeth in each face
What vice or virtue we're most prone t'embrace
For in man's face there hardly is a line
But of some inward passion 'tis a sign;
And he that reads this section o'er may find
The fairest face has still the clearest mind.

     A great head and round withal denote the person to
be secret, and of great application in carrying on
business, and also ingenious, and of a large imaginative
faculty and invention; and likewise laborious, constant,
and honest. The head whose gullet stands forth, and
inclines towards the earth signifies a person thrifty,
wise, peaceable, secret, of a retired temper, and
constant in the management of his affairs. A long head
and face, and great withal, denotes a vain foolish and
idle person, a weak person, credulous, and very envious.
To have one's head always shaking, and moving from side
to side, denote a shallow, weak person, unstable in all
his actions, given to lying, a great deceiver, a great
talker, prodigal in all his fortunes. A big head and
broad face show a man to be very courageous, a great
hunter after women very suspicious, bold and shameless.
He who hath a very big head, but not so proportionate as
it ought to the body, if he hath a short neck and crooked
gullet, is generally a man of apprehension, wise, secret,
ingenious, of sound judgment, faithful, true, and
courteous to all. He who hath a little head, and long
slender throat, is for the most part a man very weak, yet
apt to learn, but unfortunate in his actions. And so much
shall suffice in respect to judgment from the head and
face.


CHAPTER III.
Of Judgments drawn from several other parts of man's
body, etc.

     In the body of a man the head and face are the
principal parts, being the index which heaven has laid
open to every one's view to make a judgment therefrom,
therefore I have been the larger in my judgment from the
several parts thereof. But as to the other parts, I shall
be much more brief, as not being so obvious to the eyes
of men; yet I would proceed in order.

     The throat, if it be white, whether it be fat or
lean, shows a man to be vain-glorious, timorous, wanton,
and very much subject to choler. If the throat be so thin
and lean that the veins appear, it shows a man to be
weak, slow, and of a dull and heavy constitution.

     A long neck shows one to have a long and slender
foot, and that the person is stiff and inflexible either
to good or evil. A short neck shows one to be witty and
ingenious, but deceitful and inconstant, well skilled in
the use of arms, and yet cares not to use them, but is a
great lover of peace and quietness.

     A lean shoulder bone signifies a man to be weak,
timorous, peaceful, not laborious, and yet fit for any
employment. He whose shoulder bones are of a great
bigness is commonly, by the rules of physiognomy, a
strong man, faithful, but unfortunate; somewhat dull of
understanding, very laborious, a great eater and drinker,
and one equally contented in all conditions. He whose
shoulder bone seemeth to be smooth, is by the rule of
nature modest in his look, and temperate in all his
actions, both at bed and board. He whose shoulder bone
bends, and is crooked inwardly, is commonly a dull
person, and withal deceitful.

     Long arms hanging down, and touching the knees,
though such arms are rarely seen, denotes a man liberal,
but withal vain-glorious, proud and inconstant. He whose
arms are very short in respect of the stature of his
body, is thereby signified to be a man of high and
gallant spirit, of a graceful temper, bold and warlike.
He whose arms are full of bones, sinews, and flesh, is a
great desirer of novelties, and beauteous, and one that
is very credulous, and apt to believe every thing. He
whose arms are very hairy, whether they be lean or fat,
is, for the most part, a luxurious person, weak in body
and mind, very suspicious, and malicious withal. He whose
arms have no hair on them at all, is of a weak judgment,
very angry, vain, wanton, credulous, easily deceiveth
himself, and yet a great deceiver of others, no fighter,
and very apt to betray his dearest friends.


CHAPTER IV.
Of Palmistry showing the various Judgments drawn from the
hand.

     BRING engaged in this third part to show what
judgment may be drawn, according to the physiognomy, from
the several parts of the body, and coming in order to
speak of the hands, it has put me under a necessity of
saying something about palmistry, which is a judgment,
made of the conditions, inclinations and fortunes of men
and woman from the various lines and characters nature
has imprinted in their hands, which are almost as various
as the hands that have them.
<illustration: Diagram of a hand.> arist14.gif

     The reader should remember, that one of the lines of
the hand, and which indeed is reckoned principal, is
called the line of life; this line incloses the thumb,
separating it from the hollow of the hand. The next to
it, which is called the natural line, takes its beginning
from the Sing of the fore-finger, near the line of life,
and reaches to the table line, and generally makes a
triangle. The table line, commonly called the line of
fortune, begins under the little finger, and ends near
the middle finger. The girdle of Venus, which is another
line so called, begins near the first joint of the little
finger and ends between the fore-finger and the middle
finger.

     The line of death is that which plainly appears in a
counter line to that of life, and is called the sister
line, ending usually as the other ends; for when the line
of life is ended, death comes, and it can go no farther.
There are lines in the fleshy parts, as in the ball of
the thumb, which is called the Mount of Venus; under each
of the fingers are also mounts, which are each one
governed by several planets; and the hollow of the hand
is called the Plain of Mars; thus --

The thumb we to Dame Venus' rule commit,
Jove the fore-finger sways as he thinks fit:
Old Saturn does the middle finger guide:
O'er the ring finger Sol does still preside:
The outside drawn pale Cynthia does direct:
And into th' hollow Mars does most inspect:
The little finger does to Mercury fall;
Which is the nimblest Planet of them all.

     I proceed to give judgment from these several lines:
In Palmistry, the left hand is chiefly to be regarded
because therein the lines are most visible, and have the
strictest communication with the heart and brain. In the
next place, observe the line of life, and if it be fair
extending to its full length, and not broken with an
intermixture of cross-lines, it shows long life and
health: and it is the same if a double line of life
appears, as there sometimes does. When the stars appear
in this line, it is a signification of great losses and
calamities; if on it there be the figures of two O's or a
Y, it threatens the person with blindness; if it wraps
itself about the table-line, then does it promise wealth
and honour to he attained by prudence and industry: If
the line be cut, jagged at the upper end, it denotes much
sickness; if this line be cut by any lines coming from
the Mount of Venus, it declares the person be unfortunate
in love and business also, and threatens him with sudden
death. A cross between the line of life and the table
line shows the person to be very liberal and charitable,
and of a noble spirit. Let us now see the signification
of the table-line.

     The table-line, when broad and of a lively colour,
shows a healthful constitution, and a quiet contented
mind, and of a courageous spirit; but if it have crosses
towards the little finger, it threatens the party with
much affliction by sickness. If the line be double, or
divided into three parts at any of the extremities, it
shows the person to be of a generous temper, and of a
good fortune to support it; but if this line be forked at
the end, it threatens the person shall suffer by
jealousies and doubts and loss of riches gotten by
deceit. If three points, such as these are found in it,
they denote the person prudent and liberal, a lover of
learning, and of a good temper. If it spreads towards the
fore and middle finger, and ends blunt, it denotes
preferment. Let us now see what is signified by the 
middle line. This line has in it oftentimes (for there is
scarce a hand in which it varies not) divers very
significant characters. Many small lines between this and
the table line threatens the party with sickness, but
also gives him hope of recovery. A half cross branching
into this line declares the person shall have honour,
riches, and good success in all his undertakings. A half
moon denotes cold and watery distempers; but a sun or
star upon this line promises prosperity and riches. This
line, double to a woman, shows she will have several
husbands, but no children.

     The Line of Venus, if it happens to be cut or
divided near the fore-finger, threatens ruin to the
party, and that it shall befall him by means of
lascivious women and bad company. Two crosses upon this
line, one being on the fore-finger and the other bending
towards the little finger, shows the party to be weak,
and inclined to modesty and virtue; indeed it generally
denotes modesty in women; and therefore those who desire
such wives usually choose them by this standard.

     The liver Line, if it be strait, and crossed by
other lines, shows the person to be of a sound judgment,
and a piercing understanding; but if it be winding,
crooked, and bending outward, it shows deceit and
flattery, and that the party is not to be trusted. If it
makes a triangle, or quadrangle, it shows the person to
be of a noble descent, and ambitious of honour and
promotion. If it happens that this line and the middle 
line begin near each other, it denotes a person to be
weak in his judgment, if a man; but if a woman, danger by
hard labour.

     The Plain of Mars being in the hollow of the hand,
most of the lines pass through it, which renders it very
significant. This plain being hollow, and the lines,
being crooked and distorted, threatens the party to fall
by his enemies. When the lines beginning at the wrist are
long within the plain, reaching to the brawn of the hand,
that shows the person to be one given to quarrelling,
often in broil, and of a hot and fiery spirit, by which
he shall suffer much damage. If deep and large crosses be
in the middle of the plain, it shows the party shall
obtain honour by martial exploits; but if it be a woman,
that she shall have several husbands, and easy labour
with her children.

     The line of death is fatal, when crosses or broken
lines appear in it; for they threaten the person with
sickness and a short life. A clouded moon appearing
therein threatens a child-bed woman with death. A star
like a comet threatens ruin by war, and death by
pestilence. But if a bright star appears therein it
promises long life and prosperity.

     As for the lines in the wrist being fair, they
denote good fortune, but if crossed and broken, the
contrary.

Thus he that nature richly understands,
May from each line imprinted in his hands,
His future fate and fortune come to know,
And in what path it is his feet shall go;
His secret inclinations he may see,
And to what vice he shall addicted be.
To th' end that when he looks into his hand
He may upon his guard the better stand,
And turn his wandering steps another way
Whene'er he finds he does from virtue stray.


CHAPTER V.
Judgments according to Physiognomy, drawn from the
several parts of the body, from the hands to the feet.

     A large and full breast shows a man valiant and
courageous, but withal proud, and hard to deal with,
quickly angry, and very apprehensive of an injury. He
whose breast is narrow, and which riseth a little in the
middle of it, is, by the best rules of physiognomy, of a
clean spirit, of a great understanding, good in counsel,
very faithful, clean both in mind and body, yet as an
ally to this, he is soon angry, and inclined long to keep
it. He whose breast is something hairy is very luxurious,
and serviceable to another. He who hath no hairs upon his
breast is a man weak by nature, of a slender capacity,
and very timorous, but of a laudable life and
conversation, inclined to peace, and much retired to
himself.

     The back of the shin bone, if the flesh be any thing
hairy and lean, and higher than any other part that is
behind, signifies a man beastly, and withal malicious. He
whose back is large, big, and fat, is thereby denoted to
be a strong and stout man, but of a heavy disposition,
vain, slow, and full of deceit.

     He or she whose belly is soft over all the body, is
weak, lustful, and fearful upon little or no occasion, of
a good understanding, and an excellent invention, but
little eaters, faithful, but of various fortune, and
meets with more adversity than prosperity. He whose flesh
is rough and hard, is a man of strong constitution, and
very bold, but vain, proud, and of a cruel temper. A
person whose skin is smooth, fat, and white, is a person
curious, vain-glorious, timorous, shamefaced, malicious,
false, and too wise to believe all he hears.

     A thigh full of strong bristly hair and the hair
inclined to curl, signifies one lusty, licentious, and
fit for copulation: thighs with but little hair, and
those soft and slender, shows the person to be reasonably
chaste, and one that has no great desire to venereal
pleasures, and who will have but few children.

     The legs of both men and women have a fleshy
substance behind, which are called calves, which nature
hath given them (as in our bock of living creatures we
have observed) in lieu of those long tails which most
other creatures have pendant behind. Now a great calf,
and he whose legs are of a great bone, and hairy withal,
denotes the person to be strong, bold, secure dull in
under standing. aid slow in business, inclined to
procreation, and for the most part fortunate in his
undertakings. Little legs, and but little hair on them,
shows the person to be weak, fearful, of a quick
understanding, and neither luxurious at bed nor board. He
whose legs do much abound with hairs, shows he has great
store in another place, and that he is lustful and
luxurious, strong, but unable in his resolution, and
abounding with all humours.

     The feet of either man or woman, if broad and thick
with flesh, and long in figure, especially if the skin
feels hard, they are by nature of a strong constitution,
and a gross nutriment, but of a weak intellect, which
renders their understandings vain. But feet that are thin
and lean, and of a soft skin, shows the person to be but
weak of body, but of a strong understanding, and of an
excellent wit.

     The soles of the feet do administer plain and
evident signs whereby the disposition and constitution of
men and women may be known, as do the palms of their
hands, as being full of lines, by which lines all the
fortunes or the misfortunes of men or women may be known,
and their manners and inclinations made plainly to
appear. But this in general we may take notice, as that
many long lines and strokes do presage great affliction,
and a very troublesome life, attended with much grief and
toil, care, poverty and misery; but short lines, if they
are thick, and full of cross lines, are yet worse in
every degree. Those, the skin of whose soles are very
thick and gross, are for the most part able, strong, and
venturous. Whereas on the contrary, those the skin of
whose soles of their feet is thin are generally weak and
timorous.

     I shall now, before I conclude (having given an
account of what judgments may be made by observing the
several parts of the body, from the crown of the head to
the sole of the feet), give an account of what judgments
may be drawn by the rules of physiognomy from things
extraneous which are found upon many, and which indeed to
them are parts of the body, but are so far from being
necessary parts that they are the deformity and burden of
it, and speak of the habit of the body as they
distinguish persons.

I.-- Of crooked and deformed Persons.

     A crooked breast or shoulder, or the exuberance of
flesh in the body either of man or woman, signifies the
person to be extremely parsimonious and ingenious, and of
great understanding, but very covetous, and scraping
after the things of the world, attended also with a very
bad memory, being also very deceitful and malicious: they
are seldom in a medium, but either virtuous or extremely
vicious. But if the person deformed hath an excrescence
on his breast instead of the back, he is for the most
part of a double heart, and very mischievous.

II.-- Of the divers manners of going, and particular
posture both of Men and Women.

     HE or she that goes slowly, making great steps as
they go, are generally persons of bad memory, and dull of
apprehension, given to loitering, and not apt to believe
what is told them. He who goes apace, and makes short
steps, is most successful in all his undertakings, swift
in his imagination, and humble in the disposition of his
affairs. He who makes wide and uneven steps, and side
long withal, is one of a greedy sordid nature, subtile,
malicious and wills to do evil.
III.-- Of the Gait or Motion in Men and Women.

     EVERY man hath a certain gait or motion, and so in
like manner hath every woman. For a man with his hands or
feet, whether he stands or sits, or speaks, is always
accompanied with an extravagant motion, unnecessary,
superfluous, and unhandsome. Such a man by the rules of
physiognomy, is vain, unwise, unchaste, a detractor,
unstable, and unfaithful. He or she whose motion is not
much when discoursing with any one, is for the most part
wise and well bred, and fit for any employment, ingenious
and apprehensive, frugal, faithful, and industrious in
business. He whose posture is forwards and backwards, or,
as it were whisking up and down, mimical, is thereby
denoted to be a vain silly person, of a heavy and dull
wit, and very malicious. He whose motion is fame and
limping, or any otherwise imperfect, or that counterfeits
an imperfection, is denoted to be envious, malicious,
false, and detracting.

IV.-- Judgments drawn from the Stature of Man.

     PHYSIOGNOMY draws several judgments also from the
stature of a man, which take as followeth: If a man he
upright and straight, inclined rather to cleanness than
fat, it shows him to be bold, cruel, proud, clamorous,
hard to please, and harder to be reconciled when
displeased, very frugal, deceitful, and in many things
malicious. To be of a tall stature; and corpulent with
it, denotes him to be not only handsome but valiant also,
but of no extraordinary understanding, and which is worst
of all, ungrateful and trepanning. He who is extremely
tall, and very lean and thin, is a projecting man, that
designs no good to himself, and suspects every one to be
as bad as himself, importunate to obtain what he desires,
and extremely wedded to his own humours. He who is thick
and short is vain, envious, suspicious, and very shallow
of apprehension, easy of belief, but very long before he
will forget any injury. He who is lean and short, but
upright withal, is, by the rules of physiognomy, wise and
ingenious, bold and confident, and of a good
understanding, but of a deceitful heart. He who stoops as
he goes, not so much by age as custom, is very laborious,
a retainer of secrets, but very incredulous, and not easy
to believe every vain report he hears. He that goes with
his belly 'stretching forth is sociable, merry, and easy
to be persuaded.

V.-- General Observations worthy of Note.

     WHEN you find a red man to be faithful, a tall man
to be wise, a fat man to be swift of foot, a lean man to
be a fool, a handsome man not to be proud, a poor man not
to be envious, a whitely man not to be wise, one that
talks through the nose to speak without sniffing, a knave
to be no liar, an upright man not to be bold and hearty
to his own loss, one that drawls when he speaks not to be
crafty and circumventing, a man of a hot constitution,
and full of hair on his breast and body, not to be
lustful; one that winks on another with his eyes, pot to
be false and deceitful; one that knows how to shuffle his
cards, to be ignorant how to deal them; a rich man to be
prodigal, a sailor and a hangman to be pitiful, a poor
man to build churches, a higler not to be a liar, and a
praiser of his ware; a buyer not to find fault with and
undervalue that which he would willingly buy; a quack
doctor to have a good conscience both to God and man; a
bailiff or catchpole not to be a merciless villain; an
hostess not to over reckon you, and an usurer to be
charitable; then say you have found a prodigy, or men
acting contrary to the course of their nature.
