
TITLE PAGE

THE
POETICAL WORKS
OF
JOHN SKELTON:

PRINCIPALLY ACCORDING TO THE EDITION
OF THE
REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOLUME I.

BOSTON:
LITTLE, BROWN AND COMPANY
NEW YORK: BLAKEMAN AND MASON.
CINCINNATI: RICKEY AND CARROLL.
MDCCCLXIV.

Introduction by Isaac D'Israeli

At a period when satire had not yet assumed any legitimate
form, a singular genius appeared in Skelton. His satire is
peculiar, but it is stamped by vigorous originality. The
fertility of his conceptions in his satirical or his humorous
vein is thrown out in a style created by himself. The
Skeltonical short verse, contracted into five or six, and even
four syllables, is wild and airy. In the quick-returning
rhymes, the playfulness of the diction, and the pungency of new
words, usually ludicrous, often expressive, and sometimes
felicitous, there is a stirring spirit which will be best felt
in an audible reading. The velocity of his verse has a carol of
its own. The chimes ring in the ear, and the thoughts are flung
about like coruscations. But the magic of the poet is confined
to his spell; at his first step out of it he falls to the earth
never to recover himself. Skelton is a great creator only when
he writes what baffles imitation, for it is his fate, when
touching more solemn strains, to betray no quality of a poet-
inert in imagination and naked in diction. Whenever his muse
plunges into the long measure of heroic verse, she is drowned
in no Heliconian stream. Skelton seems himself aware of his
miserable fate, and repeatedly, with great truth, if not with
some modesty,complains of

"Mine homely rudeness and dryness."

But when he returns to his own manner and his own rhyme, when he
riots in the wantonness of his prodigal genius, irresistible and
daring, the poet was not unconscious of his faculty; and truly he
tells,-

"Though my rime be ragged,
Tattered and jagged,
Rudely rain-beaten,
Rusty, moth-eaten,
If ye take well therewith,
It hath in it some pith."

Whether Skelton really adopted the measures of the old tavern-
minstrelsy used by harpers, who gave "a fit of mirth for a groat,"
or "carols for Christmas," or "lascivious poems for bride-ales,"
as Puttenham, the arch-critic of Elizabeth's reign, supposes; or
whether in Skelton's introduction of alternate Latin lines among
his verses he caught the Macaronic caprice of the Italians, as
Warton suggests; the Skeltonical style remains his own undisputed
possession. He is a poet who has left his name to his own verse-a
verse, airy but pungent, so admirably adapted for the popular ear
that it has been frequently copied [see note]*, and has led some
eminent critics into singular misconceptions. The minstrel tune of
the Skeltonical rhyme is easily caught, but the invention of style
and "the pith" mock these imitators. The facility of doggrel
merely of itself could not have yielded the exuberance of his
humour and the mordacity of his satire.

*Note: George Ellis, although an elegant critic, could not relish
"the Skeltonical minstrelsy." In an extract from a manuscript poem
ascribed to Skelton, "The Image of Hypocrisy," and truly
Skeltonical in every sense, he condemned it as "a piece of obscure
and unintelligible ribaldry;" and so, no doubt, it has been
accepted. But the truth is, the morsel is of exquisite poignancy,
pointed at Sir Thomas More's controversial writings, to which the
allusions in every line might be pointed out. As these works were
written after the death of Skelton, the merit entirely remains
with this fortunate imitator.

This singular writer has suffered the mischance of being too
original for some of his critics; they looked on the surface, and
did not always suspect the depths they glided over: the legitimate
taste of others has revolted against the mixture of the ludicrous
and the invective. A taste for humour is a rarer faculty than most
persons imagine; where it is not indigenous, no art of man can
plant it. There is no substitute for such a volatile existence,
and where even it exists in a limited degree, we cannot enlarge
its capacity for reception. A great master of humour, who observed
from his experience, has solemnly told us, that "it is not in the
power of every one to taste humour, however he may wish it; it is
the gift of God; and a true feeler always brings half the
entertainment along with him*." Puttenham was the first critic who
prized Skelton cheaply; the artificial and courtly critic of
Elizabeth's reign could not rightly estimate such a wild and
irregular genius. The critic's fastidious ear listens to nothing
but the jar of rude rhymes, while the courtier's delicacy shrinks
from the nerve of appalling satire. "Such," says this critic, "are
the rhymes of Skelton, usurping the name of a Poet Laureat, being
indeed but a rude rayling rhimer, and all his doings ridiculous-
pleasing only the popular ear." This affected critic never
suspected "the pith" of "the ridiculous ;" the grotesque humour
covering the dread invective which shook a Wolsey under his
canopy. Another Elizabethan critic, the obsequious Meres, re-
echoes the dictum. These opinions perhaps prejudiced the historian
of our poetry, who seems to have appreciated them as the echoes of
the poet's contemporaries. Yet we know how highly his
contemporaries prized him, notwithstanding the host whom he
provoked. One poetical brother (Sterne) distinguishes him as "the
Inventive Skelton,".

In the public rejoicings at the defeat of the Armada in 1589, a
ludicrous bard poured forth his patriotic effusions in what he
called "A Skeltonical Salutation, or Condign Gratulation," of the
Spaniard, who, he says,-

"In a bravado,
Spent many a crusado."

In a reprint of the poem of "Elynour Rumming," in 1624, which may
be found in the Harl. Miscellany, vol. i., there is a poem
prefixed which ridicules the lovers of tobacco; this anachronism
betrays the imitator. At the close there are some verses from the
Ghost of Skelton; but we believe it is a real ghost.

"A poet for his art,
Whose judgment sure was high,
And had great practise of the pen,
His works they will not lie;
His termes to taunts did leane,
His talk was as he wrate,
Full quick of wit, right sharpe of wordes,
And skilful of the state;
*****
And to the hateful minde,
That did disdaine his doings still,
A scorner of his kinde."

When Dr. Johnson observed that "Skelton cannot be said to have
attained great elegance of language," he tried Skelton by a test
of criticism at which Skelton would have laughed, and "jangled and
wrangled." Warton has also censured him for adopting "the familiar
phraseology of the common people." The learned editor of Johnson's
Dictionary corrects both our critics. "If Skelton did not attain
great elegance of -language, he however possessed great knowledge
of it. From his works may be drawn an abundance of terms which
were then in use among the vulgar as well as the learned, and
which no other writer of his time so obviously (and often so
wittily) illustrated. Skelton seems to have been fully aware of
the condition of our vernacular idiom when he wrote, for he has
thus described it:-

"Our natural tongue is rude,
And hard to be ennewed
With polished termes lusty;
Our language is so rusty,
So cankered, and so full
Of frowards, and so dull,
That if I would apply
To write ordinately,
I wot not where to find
Terms to serve my mind."

It was obviously his design to be as great a creator of words as
he was of ideas. Many of his mintage would have given strength to
our idiom. Caxton, as a contemporary, is some authority that
Skelton improved the language.

Let not the reader imagine that Skelton was only "a rude rayling
rhimer." Skelton was the tutor of Henry the Eighth; and one who
knew him well describes him, as-

"Seldom out of prince's grace."

Erasmus distinguished him as "the light and ornament of British
letters;" and one, he addresses the royal pupil, "who can not only
excite your studies, but complete them." Warton attests his
classical attainments: "Had not his propensity to the ridiculous
induced him to follow the whimsies of Walter Mapes, Skelton would
have appeared among the first writers of Latin poetry in England."
Skelton chose to be himself; and this is what the generality of
his critics have not taken in their view.

Skelton was an ecclesiastic who was evidently among those who had
adopted the principles of reformation before the Reformation. With
equal levity and scorn he struck at the friars from his pulpit or
in his ballad, he ridiculed the Romish ritual, and he took unto
himself that wife who was to be called a concubine. To the same
feelings we may also ascribe the declamatory invective against
Cardinal Wolsey, from whose terrible arm he flew into the
sanctuary of Westminster, where he remained protected by Abbot
Islip until his death, which took place in 1529, but a few short
months before the fall of Wolsey. It is supposed that the king did
not wholly dislike the levelling of the greatness of his overgrown
minister ; and it is remarkable that one of the charges
subsequently brought by the council in 1529 against Wolsey-his
imperious carriage at the council-board-is precisely one of the
accusations of our poet, only divested of rhyme; whence perhaps we
may infer that Skelton was an organ of the rising party.

"Why come you not to Court?"-that daring statepicture of an
omnipotent minister-and "The Book of Colin Clout," where the poet
pretends only to relate what the people talk about the luxurious
clergy, and seems to be half the reformer, are the most original
satires in the language. In the days when Skelton wrote these
satires there appeared a poem known by the title of "Reade, and be
not Wrothe," a voluminous invective against the Cardinal and the
Romish superstitions, which has been ascribed by some to Skelton.
The writer was William Roy, a friar; the genius, though not the
zeal, of Roy and Skelton are far apart-as far as the buoyancy of
racy originality is removed from the downright earnestness of
grave mediocrity. Roy had been the learned assistant of Tyndale in
the first edition of the translation of the New Testament, and it
was the public conflagration at London of that whole edition which
aroused his indignant spirit. The satire, which had been printed
abroad, was diligently suppressed by an emissary of the Cardinal 
purchasing up all the copies; and few were saved from the ravage;
the author, however, escaped out of the country.

After the death of the Cardinal it was reprinted, in 1546; but the
satire was weakened, being transferred from Wolsey and wholly laid 
on the clergy. The very rare first edition is reprinted in the
Harleian Miscellany, by Parke, vol. ix. Tyndale has reproached his
colleague with being somewhat artful and mutable in his
friendships; but the wandering man proved the constancy of his
principles, for as a heretic he perished at the stake in Portugal.
It has passed through a reprint by the Roxburgh Club.

In "The Crown of Lawrell" Skelton has himself furnished a
catalogue of his numerous writings, the greater number of which
have not come down to us. Literary productions were at that day
printed on loose sheets, or in small pamphlets, which the winds
seem to have scattered. We learn there of his graver labours. He
composed the "Speculum Principis" for his royal pupil-

"To bear in hand, therein to read,"

and he translated Diodorus Siculus-"Six volumes engrossed, it doth
contain." To have composed a manual for the education of a prince,
and to have persevered through a laborious version, are sufficient
evidence that the learned Skelton had his studious days as well as
his hours of caustic jocularity. He appears to have written
various pieces for the court entertainment; but for us exists only
an account of the interlude of the " Nigramansir," in the pages of
Warton, and a single copy of the goodly interlude of "Magnificence,"
in the Garrick collection. If we accept his abstract personations
merely as the names, and not the qualities of the dramatic
personages, "Magnificence" approaches to the true vein of comedy.

Skelton was, however, probably more gratified by his own
Skeltonical style, moulding it with the wantonness of power on
whatever theme, comic or serious. In a poem remarkable for its
elegant playfulness, a very graceful maiden, whose loveliness the
poet has touched with the most vivid colouring, grieving over the
fate of her sparrow from its feline foe, chants a dirige, a
paternoster, and an Ave Maria for its soul, and the souls of all
sparrows. In this discursive poem, which glides from object to
object, in the vast abundance of fancy, a general mourning of all
the birds in the air, and many allusions to the old romances,
"Philip Sparrow," for its elegance, may be placed by the side of
Lesbia's Bird, and, for its playfulness, by the Ver Vert of
Gresset.

But Skelton was never more vivid than in his Alewife, and all

"The mad mummyng
Of Elynoure Rummyng,"-

a piece which has been more frequently reprinted than any of his
works. It remains a morsel of poignant relish for the antiquary,
still enamoured of the portrait of this grisly dame of
Leatherhead, where her name and her domicile still exist. Such is
the immortality a poet can bestow. "The Tunnyng of Elynoure
Rumrayng" is a remarkable production of The Grotesque, or the low
burlesque; the humour as low as you please, but as strong as you
can imagine. Cleland is reported, in Spence's Anecdotes of Pope,
to have said, that this "Tunnyng of Elynoure Rummyng" was taken
from a poem of Lorenzo de' Medici. There is indeed a jocose satire
by that noble bard, entitled I Beoni, the Topers; an elegant piece
of playful humour, where the characters are a company of thirsty
souls hastening out of the gates of Florence to a treat of
excellent wine. It was printed by the Giunti, in 1568, and
therefore this burlesque piece could never have been known to
Skelton. The manners of our Alewife and her gossips are purely
English, and their contrivances to obtain their potations such as
the village of Leatherhead would afford. The latest edition of
Skelton was published in the days of Pope, which occasioned some
strictures in conversation from the great poet. The laureated poet
of Henry the Eighth is styled "beastly;" probably Pope alluded to
this minute portrait of "Elynoure Rummynge" and her crowd of
customers. Beastliness should have been a delicate subject for
censure from Pope. But surely Pope had never read Skelton; for
could that great poet have passed by the playful graces of "Philip
Sparrow" only to remember the broad gossips of "Elynoure Rummyng?"
A noble amateur laid on the shrine of this antiquated beauty 20l.
to possess her rare portrait; and, on the republication of this
portrait, Steevens wrote some sarcastic verses on the print-
collectors in the European Mag. 1794; they show this famous
commentator to have been a polished wit, though he pronounced the
Sonnets of Shakespeare unreadable. These verses have been
reprinted in Dibdin's Bibliomania.

The amazing contrast of these two poems is the most certain
evidence of the extent of the genius of the poet; he who with
copious fondness dwelt on a picture which rivals the gracefulness
of Albano, could with equal completeness give us the drunken
gossipers of an Ostade. It is true that in the one we are more
than delighted, and in the other we are more than disgusted; but
in the impartiality of philosophical criticism, we must award that
none but the most original genius could produce both. It is this
which entitles our bard to be styled the "Inventive Skelton."
But are personal satires and libels of the day deserving the
attention of posterity? I answer, that for posterity there are no
satires nor libels. We are concerned only with human nature. When
the satirical is placed by the side of the historical character,
they reflect a mutual light. We become more intimately acquainted
with the great Cardinal, by laying together the satire of the
mendacious Skelton with the domestic eulogy of the gentle
Cavendish. The interest which posterity takes is different from
that of contemporaries; our vision is more complete; they
witnessed the beginnings, but we behold the ends. We are no longer
deceived by hyperbolical exaggeration, or inflamed by unsparing
invective; the ideal personage of the satirist is compared with
the real one of the historian, and we touch only delicate truths.
What Wolsey was we know, but how he was known to his own times,
and to the people, we can only gather from the private satirist;
corrected by the passionless arbiter of another age, the satirist
becomes the useful historian of the man.

The extraordinary combination in the genius of Skelton was that of
two most opposite and potent faculties - the hyperbolical
ludicrous masking the invective. He acts the character of a
buffoon; he talks the language of drollery; he even mints a
coinage of his own, to deepen the colours of his extravagance-and
all this was for the people! But his hand conceals a poniard; his
rapid gestures only strike the deeper into his victim, and we find
that the Tragedy of the State has been acted while we were only
lookers-on before a stage erected for the popular gaze.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND EDITORIAL NOTE
This edition of the Works of John Skelton is taken from the 1843
edition by Alexander Dyce. It includes all the works in English
from that edition. The notes have also been taken mainly from
there, some additional material has been provided by the Ex-
Classics Project. The spelling has been modernised and obsolete
words standardised using the primary spelling used by the OED.
Latin verses included in the English poems, and Latin quotations
in the notes, have been translated, as follows:

*	Quotations from the Vulgate Bible have been taken from the
Douay-Rheims translation.
*	Others have been taken from public domain sources if
available; the translator has been credited in each case. PH
means Philip Henderson, taken from his 1931 edition; SP
refers to the Skelton Project, http://www.skeltonproject.com. 
We would like to acknowledge their generosity in allowing us 
to use their translations. 
*	Uncredited translations are by the Ex-Classics Project.

The Glossary is the work of the Ex-Classics project


ADVERTISEMENT.

The Poems of Skelton are here reprinted from the excellent edition
prepared by the Rev. Alexander Dyce. The various readings of the
text have in general been omitted, the space which they occupy
being out of proportion to the advantage derived from them by most
readers. The latest improvements made by Mr. Dyce have received
proper attention. A very small number of his notes have been
abridged, or dropped as superfluous; about as many have been
added, or enlarged, and a few have been altered,- it is hoped, for
the better.

CAMBRIDGE, July, 1855.



PREFACE.

THE very incomplete and inaccurate volume of 1736, and the reprint
of it in Chalmers's English Poets,<1> 1810, have hitherto been the
only editions of Skelton accessible to the general reader.

In 1814, the Quarterly Reviewer,-after censuring Chalmers for
having merely reprinted the volume of 1736, with all its errors,
and without the addition of those other pieces by Skelton which
were known to be extant,-observed, that "an editor who should be
competent to the task could not more worthily employ himself than
by giving a good and complete edition of his works."<2> Prompted
by this remark, I commenced the present edition,-perhaps with too
much self-confidence, and certainly without having duly estimated
the difficulties which awaited me. After all the attention which I
have given to the writings of Skelton, they still contain
corruptions which defy my power of emendation, and passages which
I am unable to illustrate; nor is it, therefore, without a feeling
of reluctance that I now offer these volumes to the very limited
class of readers for whom they are intended. In revising my Notes
for press, I struck out a considerable portion of conjectures and
explanations which I had originally hazarded, being unwilling to
receive from any one that equivocal commendation which Joseph
Scaliger bestowed on a literary labourer of old; "Laudo tamen
studium tuum; quia in rebus obscuris ut errare necesse est, ita
fortuitum non errare."<3>

Having heard that Ritson had made some collections for an edition
of our author, I requested the use of those papers from his
nephew, the late Joseph Frank, Esq., who most obligingly put them
into my hands: they proved, however, to be only a transcript of
Vox Populi, vox Dei (from the Harleian MS.) and a few memoranda
concerning Skelton from very obvious sources.

The individual to whom I have been the most indebted for
assistance and encouragement in this undertaking has not survived
to receive my acknowledgments; I mean the late Mr. Heber, who not
only lent me his whole collection of Skelton's works, but also
took a pleasure in communicating to me from time to time whatever
information he supposed might be serviceable. Indeed, without such
liberality on the part of Mr. Heber, a complete edition of the
poet's extant writings could not have been produced; for his
incomparable library (now unfortunately dispersed) contained some
pieces by Skelton, of which copies were not elsewhere to be found.

To Miss Richardson Currer; the Right Hon. Thomas Grenville; the
Hon. and Rev. G. N. Grenville, Master of Magdalene College,
Cambridge; Sir Harris Nicolas; Sir Francis Walgrave; Rev. Dr.
Bandinel; Rev. Dr. Bliss; Rev. John Mitford; Rev. J. J. Smith of
Caius College, Cambridge; Rev. Joseph Hunter; Rev. Joseph
Stevenson; W. H. Black, Esq.; Thomas Amyot, Esq.; J. P. Collier,
Esq.; Thomas Wright, Esq.; J. O. Halliwell, Esq.; Albert Way,
Esq.; and David Laing, Esq.;-I have to return my grateful thanks
for the important aid of various kinds which they so readily and
courteously afforded me.
ALEXANDER DYCE.
London, Gray's Inn,
Nov. 1st, 1843



NOTES TO THE PREFACE
1. "Mr. A. Chalmers," says Haslewood, "has since given place [sic]
to Skelton's name among the English poets [vol. ii. p. 227]: and
having had an opportunity to compare the original edition [that of
Marshe, 1568] with Mr. Chalmers's volume, I can pronounce the text
verbally accurate, although taken from the reprint of 1736." Brit.
Bibliogr. iv. 389. As Haslewood was generally a careful collator,
I am greatly surprised at the above assertion: the truth is, that
the reprint of 1736 (every word of which I have compared with
Marshe's edition-itself replete with errors) is in not a few
places grossly inaccurate.-The said reprint is without the
editor's name; but I have seen a copy of it in which Gifford had
written with a pencil, "Edited by J. Bowie, the stupidest of all
two-legged animals."

2. Q. Rev. xi. 485. The critique in question was written by Mr.
Southey,-who, let me add, took a kind interest in the progress of
the present edition.

3. "I praise your scholarship, however; for though in these
obscure matters you must needs err, sometimes you may not"; Joanni
Isacio Pontano-Epist. p. 490. ed. 1627.



SOME ACCOUNT OF SKELTON AND HIS WRITINGS.

JOHN SKELTON<1> is generally said to have been descended from the
Skeltons of Cumberland;<2> but there is some reason to believe
that Norfolk was his native county. The time of his birth, which
is left to conjecture, cannot well be carried back to an earlier
year than 1460.

[The following entry pertaining to a John Skelton was discovered
by Mr. W. H. Black in the Public Record Office.]

23d Feb. 12 Edw. iv. [1473]. "Tribus subclericis, videlicet
Roberto Lane, Nicholao Neubold, et Johanni Skelton, videlicet
praedictis Roberto l.s. et praedictis Nicholao et Johanni cuilibet
eorum xl.s." ("To three junior clerics, that is, Robert Lane,
Nicholas Newbold, and John Skelton, that is, to the aforesaid
Robert 50 shillings, and to the aforesaid Nicholas and John 40
shillings each") A like payment was made to John Skelton on the
9th of Dec. preceding, when he is mentioned with others under the
general denomination of clerks.) Books of the Treasury of the
Receipt of the Exchequer,-A 4. 38. fols. 26, 27. (Public Record
Office.)

There is, Mr. Black thinks, a possibility that Skelton had been
employed, while a youth, as an under-clerk in the Receipt of the
Exchequer; and he observes, that it would seem to have been a
temporary occupation, as there is no trace of any person of that
name among the admissions to offices in the Black Book.

The statement of his biographers, that he was educated at
Oxford,<3> I am not prepared to contradict: but if he studied
there, it was at least after he had gone through an academical
course at the sister university; for he has himself expressly
declared,

"Alma parens O Cantabrigensis,
 . . . .
. . . tibi quondam carus alumnus eram;"<4>
Consolatory Poem before A Replication &c.

adding in a marginal note, "Cantabrigia Skeltonidi laureato primam
mammam eruditionis pientissime propinavit."<5> Hence it is
probable that the poet was the "one Scheklton," who, according to
Cole, became M. A. at Cambridge in 1484.<6>

Of almost all Skelton's writings which have descended to our
times, the first editions<7> have perished; and it is impossible
to determine either at what period he commenced his career as a
poet, or at what dates his various pieces were originally printed.
That he was the author of many compositions which are no longer
extant, we learn from the pompous enumeration of their titles in
the Garland of Laurel.<8> The lines, Of the death of the noble
prince, King Edward the Fourth. who deceased in 1483, were
probably among his earliest attempts in verse.

In 1489 Skelton produced an elegy Upon the dolorous death and much
lamentable chance of the most honorable Earl of Northumberland,<9>
who was slain during a popular insurrection in Yorkshire. His son
Henry Algernon Percy, the fifth earl, who is there mentioned as
the "young lion, but tender yet of age,"<10> appears to have
afterwards extended his patronage to the poet:<11> at a time when
persons of the highest rank were in general grossly illiterate,
this nobleman was both a lover and a liberal encourager of
letters.

Skelton had acquired great reputation as a scholar, and had
recently been laureated at Oxford,<12> when Caxton, in 1490,
published The Book of Aeneados complied by Virgil,<13> in the
Preface to which is the following passage: "But I pray master John
Skelton, late created poet laureate in the university of Oxenford,
to oversee and correct this said book, And t'address and expound
where as shall be found fault to them that shall require it. For
him I know for sufficient to expound and English every difficulty
that is therin. For he hath late translated the epistles of
Tully,<14> and the book of Diodorus Siculus,<15> and diverse other
works out of Latin into English, not in rude and old langage, but
in polished and ornate terms craftily, as he that hath read
Virgil, Ovid, Tully, and all the other noble poets and orators, to
me unknown: And also he hath read the ix. Muses and understand
their musical sciences, and to whom of them each science is
appropred. I suppose he hath drunken of Helicon's well. Then I
pray him and such other to correct add or minish where as he or
they shall find fault,"<16> &c. The laureateship in question,
however, was not the office of poet laureate according to the
modern acceptation of the term: it was a degree in grammar,
including rhetoric and versification, taken at the university, on
which occasion the graduate was presented with a wreath of
laurel.<17> To this academical honour Skelton proudly alludes in
his fourth poem Against Garnesche:

"A King to me mine habit gave:
At Oxford, the university,
Advanced I was to that degree;
By whole consent of their senate,
I was made poet laureate." 
Fourth poem Against Garnesche

Our laureate, a few years after, was admitted ad eundem ("to the
same")at Cambridge: "An. Dom. 1493, et Hen. 7 nono. Conceditur
Johi Skelton Poet in partibus transmarinis atque Oxon, Laurea
ornato, ut apud nos eadem decoraretur;" ("In the Year of the Lord
1493, ninth year of the reign of Henry vii, John Skelton, Poet,
laureate at Oxford and abroad, was honoured in the same way among
us") again, "An. 1504-5, Conceditur Johi Skelton, Poetae Laureat.
quod possit stare eodem gradu hic quo stetit Oxoniis, et quod
possit uti habitu sibi concesso a Principe." ("In the year 1504-5,
John Skelton, Poet Laureate, was granted the right to the same
rank (degree) here as he has in Oxford, and the right to wear the
habit granted by the Prince") Warton, who cites both these
entries,<18> remarks, "the latter clause, I believe, relates to
some distinction of habit, perhaps of fur or velvet, granted him
by the King." There can be no doubt that Skelton speaks of this
peculiar apparel in the lines just quoted, as also in his third
poem Against Garnesche, where he says,

"Your sword ye swear, I ween,
So trenchant and so keen,
Shall kit both white and green
Your folly is too great
The King's colours to threat;"
Third poem Against Garnesche

from which we may infer that he wore, as laureate, a dress of
white and green, or, perhaps, a white dress with a wreath of
laurel. It was most probably on some part of the same habit that
the word Calliope was embroidered in letters of silk and gold:

"Calliope,
As ye may see,
Regent is she
Of poetes all,
Which gave to me
The high degree
Laureate to be
Of fame royal;
Whose name enrolled
With silk and gold
I dare be bold
Thus, for to wear" &c.
Calliope

In the following passage Barclay perhaps glances at Skelton, with
whom (as will afterwards be shown) he was on unfriendly terms;

"But of their writing though I ensue the rate,
No name I challenge of Poet Laureate:
That name unto them is meet and doth agree
Which writeth matters with curiosity.
Mine habit black accordeth not with green
Black betokeneth death as it is daily seen;
The green is pleasure, fresh lust and jollity;
These two in nature hath great diversity.
Then who would ascribe, except he were a fool,
The pleasaunt laurer unto the mourning cowl?"<19>

Warton has remarked, that some of Skelton's Latin verses, which
are subscribed-"Haec laureatus Skeltonis, regius orator"-"Per
Skeltonida laureatum, oratorem regium," ("Skelton the laureate,
royal orator")-seem to have been written in the character of royal
laureate;<20> and perhaps the expression "of fame royal" in
Skelton's lines on Calliope, already cited, may be considered as
strengthening this supposition. There would, indeed, be no doubt
that Skelton was not only a poet laureated at the universities,
but also poet laureate or court poet to Henry the Eighth, if the
authenticity of the following statement were established; "la
patente qui declare Skelton poète laureate d'Henry viii. est datée
de la cinquième année de son règne, ce qui tomb en 1512 ou 1513:"
so (after giving correctly the second entry concerning Skelton's
laureation at Cambridge) writes the Abbé du Resnel in an essay
already mentioned; having received, it would seem, both these
statements concerning Skelton from Carte the historian, <21> who,
while he communicated to Du Resnel one real document, was not
likely to have forged another for the purpose of misleading the
learned Frenchman. On this subject I can only add, that no proof
has been discovered of Skelton's having enjoyed an annual salary
from the crown in consequence of such an office.

The reader will have observed that in the first entry given above
from the Cambridge Univ. Regist. Skelton is described as having
been laureated not only at Oxford but also "transmarinis
partibus." That the foreign seat of learning at which he received
this honour was the university of Louvaine,<22> may be inferred
from the title of a poem which I subjoin entire, not only because
it occurs in a volume of the greatest rarity, but because it
evinces the celebrity which Skelton had attained.

"IN CLARISSIMI SCHELTONIS LOUANIENSIS POETAE LAUDES
EPIGRAMMA.

Quum terra omnifero laetissima risit amictu,
Plena novo foetu quaelibet arbor erat;
Vertice purpurei vultus incepit honores
Extensis valvis pandere pulchra rosa;
Et segetum tenero sub cortice grana tumescent,
Flavescens curvat pendula spica caput.
Vix Cancri tropicos aestus lustravit anhelans
Pythius, et Nemeae vertit ad ora ferae,
Vesper soils equos oriens dum clausit Olympo,
Agmina stellarum surgere cuncta jubet:
Hic primo aspiceres ut Cynthia vecta sereno
Extulerat surgens cornua clara polo;
Inde Hydram cernas, stravit quam clava trinodis
Alcidae, nitidis emicuisse comis;
Tum<23> Procyon subiit, praepes Lepus, hinc Jovis ales,
Arctos, et Engonasus, sidus et Eridani;
Ignivomis retinet radiis quae stellifer orbis
(Quid multis remorer?) sidera cuncta micant.
Nutat Atlanteum convexum pondus, ocellis
Dum lustro haec aegris, vergit et oceano.
Tum furtim alma quies repens mihi membra soporat,
Curaque Lethaeo flumine mersa jacet:
O mihi quam placidis Icelos tulit aurea somnis
Somnia, musiphilis non caritura fide!
Nuncia percelebris Polyhymnia blanda salutans
Me Clarii ut visam numina sacra citat.
Ut sequar hanc laetus, mihi visus amoena vireta
Et nemorum umbrosos praeteriisse sinus:
Scilicet haec montes monstraverat inter eundum
Et fontes Musae quos coluere sacros;
Castalios latices, Aganippidos atque Medusei
Vidimus alipedis flumina rupta pede;
Antra him Libethri monstrat Pimpleidos undas,
Post vada Cephisi, Phocidos atque lacus;
Nubifer assurgit mons Pierus atque Cithaeron,
Gryneumque nemus dehinc Heliconque sacer:
Inde et Parnasi bifidi secreta subimus,
Tota ubi Mnemosynes sancta propago manet.
Turba pudica novem dulce hic cecinere sororum;
Delius in medio plectra chelynque sonat:
Aurifluis laudat modulis monumenta suorum
Vatum, quos dignos censet honore poli:
De quo certarunt Salamin, Cumae, vel Athenae,
Smyrna, Chios, Colophon, primus Homerus erat;
Laudat et Orpheum, domuit qui voce leones,
Eurydicen Stygiis qui rapuitque rogis;
Antiquum meminit Musaeum Eumolpide natum,
Te nec Aristophanes Euripidesque tacet;
Vel canit illustrem genuit quem Teia tellus,
Quemque fovit dulci Coa camena sinu;
Deinde cothurnatum celebrem dat laude Sophoclem,
Et quam Lesbides pavit amore Phaon;
AEschylus, Amphion, Thespis nec honore carebant,
Pindarus, Alcaeus, quem tuleratque Paros;
Sunt alii plures genuit quos terra Pelasga,
Daphnaeum cecinit quos meruisse decus:
Tersa Latinorum dehinc multa poemata texit,
Laude nec Argivis inferiora probat;
Insignem tollit ter vatem, cui dedit Andes
Cunas urbs, clarum Parthenopaea taphum;
Blanda Corinna, tui Ponto religatus amore,
Sulmoni natus Naso secundus erat;
Inde nitore fluens lyricus genere Appulus ille
Qui Latiis primus mordica metra tulit;
Statius AEacidem sequitur Thebaida pingens,
Emathio hinc scribens praelia gesta solo;
Cui Verona parens lathe mollis seriptor amorum,
Tu nec in obscuro, culte Tibulle, lates;
Haud reticendus erat cui patria Bilbilis, atque
Persius hinc mordax crimina spurca notans;
Eximius pallet vel Seneca luce tragoedus,
Comicus et Latii bellica praeda ducis;
Laudat et hinc alios quos saecula prisca fovebant;
Hos omnes longum iam meminisse foret.
Tum<24> Smintheus, paulo spirans, ait, ecce, sorores,
Qum clausa oceano terra Britanna nitet!
Oxoniam claram Pataraea ut regna videtis,
Aut Tenedos, Delos, qua mea fama viret:
Nonne fluunt istic nitidae Permessidos undae,
Istic et Aoniae sunt juga visa mihi?
Alma fovet vates nobis haec terra ministros,
Inter quos Schelton jure canendus adest:
Numina nostra colit; canit hic vel carmina cedro
Digna, Palatinis et socianda sacris;
Grande decus nobis addunt sua scripta, linenda
Auratis, digna ut posteritate, notis;
Laudiflua excurrit serie sua culta poesis,
Certatim palmam lectaque verba petunt;
Ora lepore fluunt, sicuti dives Tagus auro,
Aut pressa Hyblaeis dulcia mella favis;
Rhetoricus sermo riguo fecundior horto,
Pulchrior est multo puniceisque rosis,
Unda limpidior, Parioque politior albo,
Splendidior vitro, candidiorque nive,
Mitior Alcinois pomis, fragrantior ipso
Thureque Pantheo, gratior et violis;
Vincit te, suavi Demosthene, uncit Ulyxim
Eloquio, atque senem quem tulit ipse Pylos;
Ad fera bella trahat verbis, nequiit quod Atrides
Aut Brisis, rigidum te licet, AEacides;
Tantum eius verbis tribuit Suadela Venusque
Et Charites, animas quolibet ille ut agat,
Vel Lacedaemonios quo Tyrtaeus pede claudo
Pieriis vincens martia tela modis,
Magnus Alexander quo belliger actus ab illa
Maeonii vatis grandisonante tuba;
Gratia tanta suis virtusque est diva camenis,
Ut revocet manes ex Acheronte citos;
Leniat hic plectro vel pectora saeva leonum,
Hic strepitu condat moenia vasta lyrae;
Omnimodos animi possit depellere morbos,
Vel Niobes luctus Heliadumque truces;
Reprimat hic rabidi Saulis sedetque furores,
Inter delphinas alter Arion erit;
Ire Cupidineos quovis hic cogat amores,
Atque diu assuetos hic abolere queat;
Auspice me tripodas sentit, me inflante calores
Concipit aethereos, mystica diva canit;
Stellarum cursus, naturam vasti et Olympi,
Aeris et vires hic aperire potest,
Vel quid cunctiparens gremio tellus fovet almo
Gurgite quid teneat velivolumque mare;
Monstratur digito phoenice ut rarior uno,
Ecce virum de quo splendida fama volat!
Ergo decus nostrum quo fulget honorque, sorores,
Heroas laudes accumulate viro;
Laudes accumulent Satyri, juga densa Lycaei,
Pindi, vel Rhodopes, Maenala quique colunt;
Ingeminent plausus Dryades facilesque Napaeae,
Oreadum celebris turba et Hamadryadum;
Biandisonum vatem, vos Oceanitidesque atque
Naiades, innumeris tollite praeconiis;
AEterno vireat quo vos celebravit honore,
Illius ac astris fama perennis eat:
Nunc maduere satis vestro, nunc prata liquore
Flumina, Pierides, sistite, Phoebus ait.
Sat cecinisse tuum sit, mi Schelton, tibi laudi
Haec Whitintonum: culte poeta, vale.
Ex capitalibus hexametrorum litteris solerter compositis emergit
hoc distichon;
Qua Whitintonus canit ad laudes tibi, Schelton,
Anglorum natum gloria, sume libens."<25>

The following verses are transcribed from a MS. (in the collection
of the late Mr. B. H. Bright,) consisting of Hymni, &c., by Picus
Mirandula:-

"Pici Mirandulae Carmen Extemporale.

Quid tibi facundum nostra in praeconia fontem
Solvere collibuit,
Sterna vates, Skelton, dignissime lauro,
Castalidumque decus?
Nos neque Pieridum celebramus antra sororum,
Forte nec Aonio
Ebibimus natum ditantes ora liquores.
At tibi Apollo chelym [sic]
Auratam dedit, et vocalia plectra sorores;
Inque tuis labiis
Dulcior Hyblaeo residet suadela liquore:
Sed tibi Calliope
Infudit totam: tu carmine vincis olorem;
Cedit et ipse tibi
Ultro porrecta cithara Rhodopeius Orpheus:
Tu modulante lyra
Et mulcere feras et duras ducere quercus,
Tu potes et rapidos
Flexanimis fidibus fluviorum sistere cursus;
Flectere saxa potes.
Graecia Maeonio quantum debebat Homero,
Mantua Virgilio,
Tantum Skeltoni iam sed debere fatetur
Terra Britanna suo:
Primus in hanc Latio deduxit ab orbe Camenas;
Primus hic edocuit
Exculte pureque loqui: te principe, Skelton,
Anglia nil metuat
Vel cum Romanis versa certare poetis.
Vive valeque diu!

Another laudatory notice of Skelton by a contemporary writer will
not here be out of place;

"To all ancient poets, little book, submit thee,
Whilom flowering in eloquence facundious,
And to all other which present now be;
First to master Chaucer and Ludgate sententious,
Also to pregnant Barkley now being religious,
To inventive Skelton and poet laureate;
Pray them all of pardon both early and late."<26>

Skelton frequently styles himself "orator regius;"<27> but the
nature of the office from which he derived the title is not, I
believe, understood. The lines in which, as we have just seen,
Whittington so lavishly praises his "rhetoricus sermo," allude
most probably to his performances in the capacity of royal orator.

In 1498 Skelton took holy orders. The days on which, during that
year, he was ordained successively subdeacon, deacon, and priest,
are ascertained by the following entries:

"In ecclesia conventuali domus sive hospitalis sancti Thome
martiris de Acon civitatis London. per Thomam Rothlucensem
episcopum ultimo die mensis Marcii M. Johannes Skelton London.
dioc. ad titulum Mon. beat Marie de Graciis iuxta Turrim London."
(In the conventual church of the monastery of St. Thomas in the
City of London, John Skelton was admitted by the Bishop of London
Thomas Rothlucensis (? his name was actually Savage?) to the order
of subdeacon of the Monastery Church of Blessed Mary of Grace
beside the Tower of London on the last day of March")

"[In cathedra sancti Pauli London. apud summum altare eiusdem per
Thomam permissione divina London. episcopum in sabbato sancto viz.
xiiii die mensis Aprilis]
Johannes Skelton poet [sic] laureatus Lond. dioc. ad titulum Mon.
de Graciis iuxta turrim London." ("In St. Paul's Cathedral at the
high altar the poet laureate John Skelton was admitted by
thedivine authority of the Bishop of London to the order of deacon
of the monastery church of [Blessed Mary of] Grace beside the
Tower of London on Holy Saturday that is, the 14th day of April")

"In ecclesia conventuali hospitalis beat Marie de Elsing per
Thomam Rothlucensem episcopum ix die mensis Iunii M. Johannes
Skelton poeta lureatus [sic] London. dim. ad titulum Mon. de
Graciis iuxta turrim London." In the conventual church of Saint
Mary in Elsing, the poet laureate John Skelton was admitted by the
Bishop of London Thomas Rothlucensis (? his name was actually
Savage?) to the order of priest of the monastery [Church of
Blessed Mary] of Grace beside the Tower of London on the ninth day
of June.")<28>

When Arthur, the eldest son of Henry the Seventh, was created
Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester, in 1489,<29> Skelton
celebrated the event in a composition (probably poetical) called
Prince Arthur's Creation,<30> of which the title alone remains;
and when Prince Henry, afterwards Henry the Eighth, was created
Duke of York, in 1494,<31> he was hailed by our author in some
Latin verses-Carmen ad principem, quando insignitus erat ducis
Ebor. titulo, ("A poem to the prince, when he was honoured with
the title of Duke of York")-a copy of which (not to be found at
present) was once among the MSS. in the Library of Lincoln
Cathedral, having been seen by Tanner, who cites the initial
words,-"Si quid habes, mea Musa." "If you have this, my Muse")
<32>

As at the last mentioned date Prince Henry was a mere infant,
there can be no doubt that the care of his education had not yet
been intrusted to our poet. It must have been several years after
1494 that Skelton was appointed tutor to that prince,-an
appointment which affords a striking proof of the high opinion
entertained of his talents and learning, as well as of the
respectability of his character. He has himself recorded in his
that he held this important situation:

"The honor of England I learned to spell,
In dignity royal that doth excel:
Note and mark well this parcel;
I gave him drink of the sugared well
Of Helicon's waters crystalline,
Acquainting him with the Muses nine.
It cometh thee well me to remorde,
That creancer<33> was to thy sovereign lord:
It pleaseth that noble prince royal
Me as his master for to call
In his learning primordial." 
Fourth poem Against Garnesche

And in another poem he informs us that he composed a treatise for
the edification of his royal pupil:

"The Duke of York's creancer when Skelton was,
Now Henry the viii. King of England,
A treatise he devised and brought it to pass,
Called Speculum Principis, to bear in his hand,
Therin to read; and to understand
All the demeanour of princely estate,
To be our King, of God preordinate."<34>
Garland of Laurel v. 1228

The Speculum Principis has perished: we are unable to determine
whether it was the same work as that entitled Methodos Skeltonidis
laureati, sc. Praecepta quaedam moralia Henrico principi, postea
Henr. viii, missa. Dat. apud Eltham A.D. MDI., which in Tanner's
days<35> was extant (mutilated at the beginning) among the MSS. in
the Lincoln Cathedral Library, but which (like the Latin verses
mentioned in a preceding page) has since been allowed to wander
away from that ill-guarded collection.

When Prince Henry was a boy of nine years old, Erasmus dedicated
to him an ode De Laudibus Britanniae, Regisque Henricus Septimus
ac Regiorum Liberorum. The Dedication contains the following
memorable encomium on Skelton; "Et haec quidem interea tamquam
ludicra munuscula tuae pueritiae dicavimus, uberiora largituri ubi
tua virtus una cum aetate accrescens uberiorem carminum materiam
suppeditabit. Ad quod equidem te adhortarer, nisi et ipse jamdudum
sponte tua velis remisque (ut aiunt) eo tenderest et domi haberes
Skeltonum, unum Britannicarum literarum lumen ac decus, qui tua
studia possit, non solum accendere, sed etiam consummare;"<36> and
in the Ode are these lines;

"Iam puer Henricus, genitoris nomine laetus,
Monstrante fonteis vate Skelton sacros,
Palladias teneris meditatur ab unguibus arteis."<37>

The circumstances which led to the production of this Ode are
related by Erasmus in the following curious passage: "Is erat
labor tridui, et tamen labor, quod iam annos aliquot nec legeram
nec scripseram ullum carmen. Id partim pudor a nobis extorsit,
partim dolor. Pertraxerat me Thomas Morus,<38> qui tum me in
praedio Montjoii<39> agentem inviserat, ut animi causa in proximum
vicum<40> expatiaremur. Nam illic educabantur omnes liberi regii,
uno Arcturo excepto, qui tum erat natu Maximus. Ubi ventum est in
aulam, convenit tota pompa, non solum domus illius, verum etiam
Montjoiicae. Stabat in medio Henricus annos natus novem, iam tum
indolem quondam regiam prae se ferens, h. e. animi celsitudinem
cum singulari quadam humanitate conjunctam. A dextris erat
Margareta, undecim ferme annos nata, qua post nupsit Jacobo
Scotorum Regi. A sinistris, Maria lusitans annos nata quatuor. Nam
Edmondus adhuc infans, in ulnis gestabatur. Morus cum Arnoldo
sodali salutato puero Henrico, quo rege nunc floret Britannia,
nescio quid scriptorum obtulit. Ego, quoniam hujusmodi nihil
expectabam, nihil habens quod exhiberem, pollicitus sum aliquo
pacto meum ergo ipsum studium aliquando declaraturum. Interim
subirascebar Moro, quod non praemonuisset; et eo magis, quod puer
Epistolio inter prandendum ad me misso, meum calamum provocaret.
Abii domum, ac vel invitis Musis, cum quibus iam longum fuerat
divortium, Carmen intro tridum absolvi. Sic et ultus sum dolorem
meum et pudorem sarsi."<41>

The mother of Henry the Seventh, the Countess of Richmond and
Derby, is well known to have used her utmost exertions for the
advancement of literature; she herself translated some pieces from
the French; and, under her patronage, several works (chiefly works
of piety) were rendered into English by the most competent
scholars of the time. It is to her, I apprehend, that Skelton
alludes in the following passage of the Garland of Laurel, where
he mentions one of his lost performances;

"Of my Lady's grace at the contemplation,
Out of French into English prose,
Of Man's Life the Peregrination,
He did translate, interpret, and disclose."
Garland of Laurel v 1221.

According to Churchyard, Skelton was "seldom out of prince's
grace:"<42> yet among the Acts, Orders, and Decrees made by the
King and his Counsel, remaining amongst the Records of the Court,
now commonly called the Court of Requests, we find, under anno 17.
Henry vii.; "10 Junii apud Westminster Jo. Skelton commissus
carceribus Janitoris Domini Regis."<43> What could have occasioned
this restraint, I cannot even conjecture, but in those days of
extrajudicial imprisonments he might have been incarcerated for a
very slight offence. It is, however, by no means certain that the
"Jo. Skelton" of the above entry was the individual who forms the
subject of the present essay;<44> and it is equally doubtful
whether or not the following entry, dated the same year, relates
to the mother of the poet;

(Easter term, 17. Henry vii.) "Johanne Skelton vidue de regard.
Domini Regis-iij.li. vj.s. viij.d." <45>

It has been already shewn that Skelton took holy orders in
1498.<46> How soon after that period he became rector of Diss in
Norfolk, or what portion of his life was spent there in the
exercise of his duties, cannot be ascertained. He certainly
resided there in 1504 and 1511,<47> and, as it would seem from
some of his compositions,<48> in 1506, 1507 and 1513; in the year
of his decease he was, at least nominally, the rector of Diss.<49>

We are told<50> that for keeping, under the title of a concubine,
a woman whom he had secretly married, Skelton was called to
account, and suspended from his ministerial functions by his
diocesan, the bloody-minded and impure Richard Nykke (or Nix),<51>
at the instigation of the friars, chiefly the Dominicans, whom the
poet had severely handled in his writings. It is said, too, that
by this woman he had several children, and that on his death-bed
he declared that he conscientiously regarded her as his wife, but
that such had been his cowardliness, that he chose rather to
confess adultery (concubinage) than what was then reckoned more
criminal in an ecclesiastic-marriage.

It has been supposed that Skelton was curate of Trumpington near
Cambridge<52> (celebrated as the scene of Chaucer's Miller's
Tale,) because at the end of one of his smaller poems are the
following words;

"Auctore Skelton, rectore de Dis.
Finis, &c. Apud Trumpinton scriptum<53> per Curatum eiusdem,
quinto die Januarii Anne Domini, secundum computat. Anglia,
MDVII."<54>
Epitaph For John Clarke And Adam Udersall

But the meaning evidently is, that the curate of Trumpington had
written out the verses composed by the rector of Diss; and that
the former had borrowed them from the latter for the purpose of
transcription, is rendered probable by two lines which occur soon
after among some minor pieces of our author;

"Hanc volo transcribas, transcriptam moxque remittas
Pagellam; quia sunt qui mea scripta sciunt,"<55>

Anthony Wood affirms that "at Disse and in the diocese" Skelton
"was esteemed more fit for the stage than the pew or pulpit."<56>
It is at least certain that anecdotes of the irregularity of his
life, of his buffoonery as a preacher, &c. &c. were current long
after his decease, and gave rise to that tissue of extravagant
figments which was put together for the amusement of the vulgar,
and entitled the Merry Tales of Skelton.<57>

Churchyard informs us that Skelton's "talk was as he wrote;"<58>
and in this propensity to satire, as well in conversation as in
writing, originated perhaps those quarrels with Garnesche,
Barclay, Gaguin, and Lily, which I have now to notice.

As the four poems Against Garnesche were composed "by the King's
most noble commandment," we may conclude that the monarch found
amusement in the angry rhymes with which Skelton overwhelmed his
opponent. Garnesche it appears, was the challenger in this
contest;<59> and it is to be regretted that his verses have
perished, because in all probability they would have thrown some
light on the private history of Skelton. The Flyting of Dunbar and
Kennedy <60> bears a considerable resemblance to the verses
against Garnesche; but the two Scottish poets are supposed to have
carried on a sportive warfare of rude raillery, while a real
animosity seems to have existed between our author and his
adversary.<61> At the time of this quarrel (the exact date of
which cannot be determined) Christopher Garnesche was gentleman
usher to Henry the Eighth, and dignified with knighthood;<62> and
(if Skelton may be credited) had risen from the performance of
very menial offices to the station which he then occupied. As he
had no claims on the remembrance of posterity, little is known
concerning him; but since we have evidence that his services were
called for on more than one occasion of importance, he must have
been a person of considerable note. He is twice incidentally
mentioned in connection with the royal sisters of Henry the
Eighth. In 1514, when the Princess Mary embarked for France, in
order to join her decrepit bridegroom Louis the Twelfth, Garnesche
formed one of the numerous retinue selected to attend her, and had
an opportunity of particularly distinguishing himself during that
perilous voyage: "The ii. day of October at the hour of four of
the clock in the morning this fair lady took her ship with all her
noble company; and when they had sailed a quarter of the sea, the
wind rose and severed some of the ships to Calais, and some in
Flanders, and her ship with great difficulty was brought to
Boulogne, and with great jeopardy at the entering of the haven,
for the master ran the ship hard on shore, but the boats were
ready and received this noble lady, and at the landing Sir
Christopher Garnesche stood in the water, and took her in his
arms, and so carried her to land, where the Duke of Vendôme and a
Cardinal with many estates received her and her ladies,"<63> &c.
Again, in a letter, dated Harbottle 18th Oct. 1515, from Lord
Dacre of Gillesland and T. Magnus to Henry the Eighth, concerning
the confinement in childbed of Margaret widow of James the Fourth,
&c. we find; "Sir Christopher Garnesche came to Morpeth immediatly
upon the queen's deliverance, and by our advice hath continued
there with such stuff as your grace hath sent to the said queen
your sister till Sunday last past, which day he delivered your
letter and disclosed your credence, greatly to the queen's
comfort. And for so much as the queen lieth as yet in childbed,
and shall keep her chamber these three weeks at the least, we have
advise the said Sir Christopher Garnesche to remain at Morpeth
till the queen's coming thither, and then her grace may order and
prepare every part of the said stuff after her pleasure and as her
grace seemeth most convenient," &c.<64> A few particulars
concerning Garnesche may be gleaned from the Books in the Public
Record Office:

(Easter Term, 18 Hen. vii.) "Cristofero Garneys de regardo de
denariis per Johannem Crawford et al. per manue. for.<65>-xl. li."
(i. e. in reward out of moneys forfeited by John Crawford and
another upon bail-bond,)

(1st Henry viii.) "Item to Cristopher Garnesche for the King's
offering at S. Edward's shrine the next day after the
Coronation<66>-vj. s. viij. d."

(Easter Term, 1-2 Henry viii.)"Cristofero Garneys uni generosorum
hostiariorum regis de annuitate sua durante regis beneplacito per
annum-x. li.
Eidem Cristofero de foedo suo ad xx. li. per annum pro termino
vite sue- xx. li." <67>

and we find that afterwards by letters patent dated 21st May, 7th
Henry viii., in consideration of his services the King granted him
an annuity of thirty pounds for life, payable half-yearly at the
Exchequer.<68>

(11th Henry viii.) "Item to Sir Christopher Garnesche knight upon
a warrant for the hire of his house at Greenwich<69> at x. li. by
the year for one half a year due at Easter last and so after half
yearly during x years<70> c. s. (100 shillings i.e. 5 pounds)

(20th Henry viii.) "Cristofero Garnyshe militi de annuitate sua ad
xxx l. per breve currens Rec. den. pro festo Michaelis ult. pret.
viz. pro uno anno integro per manes Ricardi Alen<71>

see above: this entry is several times repeated, and occurs for
the last time in 26th Henry viii.<72>

The following extracts, collected by Mr. D. E. Davy in Gent. Mag.
for Sept. 1844, p. 229:-

"Sir Christopher Garnesche, knt., whom I suppose to be the person
who was the object of Skelton's satire, was the second son of
Edmund Garnesche, esq. of Beccles, who was the second son of Peter
Garnesche, esq. of Beccles, whose eldest son, Thomas, was of
Kenton. He, 'Sir Christopher,' was janitor of Calais, and often
employed in the wars temp. H. viii. . . .

In a window of the chapel in the north aisle of St. Peter's
Mancroft Church, Norfolk, was the following inscription: ' . .
anda . . a . . Dei, pro animabus Thome Elys tertia vice huius
civitatis Norwici Majoris et Margarete consortis sue.-Orandumque
est pro animabus Edmundi Garnesche armigeri, et Matilde eius
consortis, filie predictorum Thome Elys et Margarete, ac pro
longevo statu Christopheri Garnesche militis, dicti serenissimi
Principis vile sue Calisie Janitoris.' See Blomf. Norf. Vol. iv.
p. 199. [vol. ii. 628. ed. fol.]

'A description of the Standards borne in the field by Peers and
Knights in the reign of Hen. Eighth, from a MS. in the College of
Arms marked I. 2. Compiled between the years 1510 and 1525.'- Sir
Christopher Garnesche. 'A on a wreath, Argent and Gules, an arm
erased below the elbow, and erect proper, holding a falchion
Argent, pommel and hilt Or, the blade imbrued in 3 places Gules.
(Imperfect.) - Arms. Argent a chevron Azure between 3 escallops
Sable.' Excerpta Historica, p. 317.

'Standards, temp. H. viii. Hari. MS. 4632. Sir Xr'ofer Garnesche.
Blue. The device, on a wreath Argent and Gules, an arm erased,
grasping a scimitar, Proper. -Motto, "Oublere ne dois."' Collect.
Topog. vol. iii. p. 64.

'The names of the Englishmen which were sent in Ambassade to the
French King, before the Queens Landing, and other Gentlemen in
their Company.'- Sir Christopher Garnesche (inter al.).- Leland's
Collect. vol. ii. p. 704.

In the Atheneum for July 18, 1840, p. 572, there is a long letter,
dated 'at Morpeth, the xxviij day of December,' and signed 'C.
Garneys,' whom the editor supposes to have been one of the medical
attendants sent by the King, upon the illness of Queen Margaret:
it was more probably [certainly, See above] Sir Christ. Garnesche,
knt.

Sir Christopher was knighted at Touraine, 25 Dec., 5 H. viii.
1513, and married Jane, daughter of . . . She died 27th March,
1552. Her will was dated 27th Aug 1550, and proved 12th May, 1552;
she was buried at Greenwich. Her husband was dead when she made
her will. She names her son, Arthur Dymoke, esq. Bequeathes most
of her personal estate for charitable purposes."

Bale mentions among the writings of Alexander Barclay a piece
"against Skelton."<73> It has not come down to us; but the extant
works of Barclay bear testimony to the hearty dislike with which
he regarded our author. At the conclusion of The Ship of Fools is
this contemptuous notice of one of Skelton's most celebrated
poems;

"Hold me excused, for why my will is good
Men to induce unto virtue and goodness;
I write no jest ne tale of Robin Hood,
Nor sow no sparkles ne seed of viciousness;
Wise men love virtue, wild people wantonness,
It longeth not to my science nor cunning,
For Philip the Sparow the Dirige to sing:"<74>

a sneer to which Skelton most probably alludes, when, enumerating
his own productions in the Garland of Laurel, he mentions,

"Of Philip Sparrow the lamentable fate,
The doleful destiny, and the careful chance, 
Devised by Skelton after the funeral rate;
Yet some there be therewith that take grievance,
And grudge thereat with frowning countenance;
But what of that? hard it is to please all men;
Who list amend it, let him set to his pen."
Garland of Laurel v. 1254

That a portion of the following passage in Barclay's Fourth Egloge
was levelled at Skelton, appears highly probable;

"Another thing yet is greatly more damnable:
Of rascal poets yet is a shameful rabble,
Which void of wisdom presumeth to indite,
Though they have scantly the cunning of a snite;
And to what vices that princes most intend,
Those dare these fools solemnize and commend.
Then is he decked as Poet laureate,
When stinking Thais made him her graduate:
When Muses rested, she did her season note,
And she with Bacchus her camous<75> did promote.
Such rascal dramas, promoted by Thais,
Bacchus, Licoris, or yet by Testalis,
Or by such other new forged Muses nine,
Think in their minds for to have wit divine;
They laud their verses, they boast, they vaunt and jet,
Though all their cunning be scantly worth a pet:
If they have smelled the arts trivial,
They count them Poets high and heroical.
Such is their folly, so foolishly they dote,
Thinking that none can their plain error note:
Yet be they foolish, void of honesty,
Nothing seasoned with spice of gravity,
Void of pleasure, void of eloquence,
With many words, and fruitless of sentence
Unapt to learn, disdaining to be taught,
Their private pleasure in snare hath them so caught;
And worst yet of all, they count them excellent,
Though they be fruitless, rash and improvident.
To such ambages who doth their mind incline,
They count all other as private of doctrine,
And that the faults which be in them alone,
Also be common in other men each one." <76>

In the Garland of Laurel we are told by Skelton, that among the
famous writers of all ages and nations, whom he beheld in his
vision, was

"a friar of France men call Sir Gaguin,
That frowned on me full angrily and pale;"
Garland of Laurel v. 374

and in the catalogue of his own writings which is subsequently
given in the same poem, he mentions a piece which he had composed
against this personage, "The Recule against Gaguin of the French
nation." Garland of Laurel v. 1187.

Robert Gaguin was minister-general of the Maturines, and enjoyed
great reputation for abilities and learning.<77> He wrote various
works; the most important of which is his Compendium supra
Francorum Gestis from the time of Pharamond to the author's age.
In 1490 he was sent by Charles the Eighth as ambassador to
England, where he probably became personally acquainted with
Skelton.

That Skelton composed certain Latin verses against the celebrated
grammarian William Lilly, we are informed by Bale,<78> who has
preserved the initial words, viz.

"Urgeor impulsus tibi, Lilli, retundere:"<79>

and that Lily repaid our poet in kind, we have the following
proof;

"Lilli Hendecasyllabi in Scheltonum eius carmina calumniantem.

"Quid me, Scheltone, fronte sic aperta
Carpis, vipereo potens veneno?
Quid versus trutina meos iniqua
Libras? dicere vera num licebit?
Doctrinae tibi dum parare famam
Et doctus fieri studes poeta, 
Doctrinam nec habes, nec es poeta."<80>

It would seem that Skelton occasionally repented of the severity
of his compositions, and longed to recall them; for in the Garland
of Laurel, after many of them have been enumerated, we meet with
the following curious passage;

"Item Apollo that whirlèd up his chair,
That made some to snurr and snuff in the wind;
It made them to skip, to stamp, and to stare,
Which, if they be happy, have cause to beware
In rhyming and railing with him for to mell
For dread that he learn them their A, B, C, to spell.

With that I stood up, half suddenly afraid;
Supplying to Fame, I besought her grace,
And that it would please her, full tenderly I prayed,
Out of her books Apollo to rase.
Nay, sir, she said, what so in this place
Of our noble court is once spoken out,
It must needs after run all the world about.

God wot, these words made me full sad;
And when that I saw it would no better be,
But that my petition would not be had,
What should I do but take it in gree?
For, by Jupiter and his high majesty,
I did what I could to scrape out the scrolls,
Apollo to rase out of her ragman rolls."
Garland of Laurel v. 1471

The piece which commenced with the words "Apollo that whirlèd up
his chair," and which gave such high displeasure to some of
Skelton's contemporaries, has long ago perished,-in spite of
Fame's refusal to erase it from her books!

The title-page of the Garland of Laurel, ed. 1523, sets forth that
it was "studiously devised at Sheriff-Hutton Castle," in
Yorkshire; and there seems no reason to doubt that it was written
by Skelton during a residence at that mansion. The date of its
composition is unknown; but it was certainly produced at an
advanced period of his life;<81> and the Countess of Surrey, who
figures in it so conspicuously as his patroness, must have been
Elizabeth Stafford, daughter of Edward Duke of Buckingham, second
wife of Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, and mother of that
illustrious Surrey "whose fame for aye endures." Sheriff-Hutton
Castle was then in the possession of her father-in-law, the Duke
of Norfolk,<82> the victor of Flodden Field; and she was probably
there as his guest, having brought Skelton in her train. Of this
poem, unparalleled for its egotism, the greater part is
allegorical; but the incident from which it derives its name,-the
weaving of a garland for the author by a party of ladies, at the
desire of the Countess, seems to have had some foundation in fact.

From a passage in the poem just mentioned, we may presume that
Skelton used sometimes to reside at the ancient college of the
Bonhommes at Ashridge; <83>

"Of the Bonhommes of Ashridge beside Berkhamstead,
That goodly place to Skelton most kind,
Where the sank royal is, Christ's blood so red,
Wherupon he metrefied after his mind;
A pleasanter place than Ashridge is, hard were to find," &c.
Garland of Laurel v. 1461

That Skelton once enjoyed the patronage of Wolsey, at whose desire
he occasionally exercised his pen, and from whose powerful
influence he expected preferment in the church, we learn from the
following passages in his works:

"Honorificatissimo, amplisssmo, longeque reverendissimo in Christo
patri, ac domino, domino Thomas, &c. tituli sanctae sacrosanctae
Romanae ecclesiae presbytero, Cardinali meritissimo, et
apostolicae sedis legato, a latereque legato superillustri, &c.
Skeltonis laureatus, ora. reg., humillimum dicit obsequium cum
omni debita reverentia, tanto tamque magnifico digna principe
sacerdotum, totiusque justitia; aequabilissimo moderatore, necnon
praesentis opusculi fautore excellentissimo, &c., ad cujus
auspicatissimam contemplationem, sub memorabili prelo gloriosae
immortalitatis, praesens pagella felicitatur, &c." A Replication,
&c. <84>

"Ad serenissimam Majestatem Regiam, pariter cum Domino Cardinali,
Legato a latere honorificatissimo, &c. Garland of Laurel v. 1587
<85>

Perge, liber, celebrem pronus regem venerare
Henricum octavum, resonans sua praemia laudis.
Cardineum dominum pariter venerando salutes,
Legatum a latere, et fiat memor ipse precare
Prebendae, quam promisit mihi credere quondam,
Meque suum referas pignus sperare salutis
Inter spemque metum.
Garland of Laurel v. 1590 <86>

'Tween hope and dread
My life I leed,
But of my speed
Small sickerness;
Howebeit I read
Both word and deed
Should be agreed
In nobleness:
Or else, &c." 
"To my Lord Cardinal's right noble grace, &c.
Garland of Laurel v 1600

Go, little quire, apace,
In most humble wise,
Before his noble Grace,
That caused you to devise
This little enterprise
And him most lowly pray,
In his mind to comprise
Those words his grace did say
Of an amice gray.
Ie foy enterment en sa bone grace."<87>
The Doughty Duke of Albany v 524

We also find that Skelton "gave to my lord Cardinal" The Book of
Three Fools.

What were the circumstances which afterwards alienated the poet
from his powerful patron, cannot now be discovered: we only know
that Skelton assailed the full-blown pride of Wolsey with a
boldness which is astonishing, and with a fierceness of invective
which has seldom been surpassed. Perhaps it would have been better
for the poet's memory, if the passages just quoted had never
reached us; but nothing unfavourable to his character ought to be
hastily inferred from the alteration in his feelings towards
Wolsey while the cause of their quarrel is buried in obscurity.
The provocation must have been extraordinary, which transformed
the humble client of the Cardinal into his "dearest foe."

We are told by Francis Thynne, that Wolsey was his father's "old
enemy, for many causes, but mostly for that my father had
furthered Skelton to publish his Colyn Cloute against the
Cardinal, the most part of which Book was compiled in my father's
house at Erith in Kent."<88> But though Colyn Cloute contains
passages which manifestly point at Wolsey, it cannot be termed a
piece "against the Cardinal:" and I have no doubt that the poem
which Thynne had in view, and which by mistake he has mentioned
under a wrong title, was our author's Why come ye not to Court. In
Colyn Cloute Skelton ventured to aim only a few shafts at Wolsey:
in Why come ye not to Court, and in Speak, Parrot, he let loose
against him the full asperity of reproach.

The bull appointing Wolsey and Campeggio to be legates a latere
jointly, is dated July 27th, 1518, that appointing Wolsey to be
sole Legate a latere 10th June, 1519;<89> and from the first two
passages which I have cited above (see above) we ascertain the
fact, that Wolsey continued to be the patron of Skelton for at
least some time after he had been invested with the dignity of
papal legate. If the third passage cited above (p. liv. ) (see
above) "Go little quaire, apace," &c. really belong to the poem
The Doughty Duke of Albany to which it is appended in Marshe's ed.
of Skelton's Works, 1568, our author must have been soliciting 
Wolsey for preferment as late as November 1523: but his most
direct satire on the Cardinal, Why come ye not to Court, was
evidently composed anterior to that period; and his Speak, Parrot
(which would require the scolia of a Tzetzes to render it
intelligible) contains seeming allusions to events of a still
earlier date. The probability (or rather certainty) is, that the
L'Envoy, "Go, little quaire," &c. has no connexion with the poem
on the Duke of Albany: in Marshe's volume the various pieces are
thrown together without any attempt at arrangement; and it ought
to be particularly noticed that between the poem against Albany
and the L'Envoy in question, another L'Envoy is interposed.<90>
Wolsey might have forgiven the allusions made to him in Colyn
Cloute; but it would be absurd to imagine that, in 1523, he
continued to patronize the man who had written Why come ye not to
Court.

The following anecdote is subjoined from Hall: "And in this season
[15 Henry viii.] the Cardinal by his power legantine dissolved the
Convocation at Paul's, called by the Archbishop of Canterbury
[Warham,] and called him and all the clergy to his convocation to
Westminster, which was never seen before in England, wherof Master
Skelton, a merry Poet, wrote,

"Gentle Paul, lay down thy sweard,
For Peter of Westminster hath shaven thy beard."<91>

From the vengeance of the Cardinal,<92> who had sent out officers
to apprehend him, Skelton took sanctuary at Westminster, where he
was kindly received and protected by the abbot Islip,<93> with
whom he had been long acquainted. In this asylum he appears to
have remained till his death, which happened June 21st, 1529. What
he is reported to have declared on his death-bed concerning the
woman whom he had secretly married, and by whom he left several
children, has been already mentioned: he is said also to have
uttered at the same time a prophecy concerning the downfall of
Wolsey.<94> He was buried in the chancel of the neighbouring
church of St. Margaret's; and, soon after, this inscription was
placed over his grave,

Joannes Skeltonus, vates Pierius, hic situs est.<95>

Concerning the personal appearance of Skelton we are left in
ignorance; for the portraits which are prefixed to the old
editions of several of his poems must certainly not be received as
authentic representations of the author.<96>

The chief satirical productions of Skelton (and the bent of his
genius was decidedly towards satire) are The Bowge of Court, Colyn
Cloute, and Why come ye not to Court.-In the first of these, an
allegorical poem of considerable invention, he introduces a series
of characters delineated with a boldness and discrimination which
no preceding poet had displayed since the days of Chaucer, and
which none of his contemporaries (with the sole exception of the
brilliant Dunbar) were able to attain: the merit of those
personifications has been allowed even by Warton, whose ample
critique on Skelton deals but little in praise;<97> and I am
somewhat surprised that Mr. D'Israeli, who has lately come forward
as the warm eulogist of our author,<98> should have passed over
The Bowge of Court without the slightest notice.- Colyn Cloute is
a general satire on the corruptions of the Church, the friars and
the bishops being attacked alike unsparingly; nor, when Skelton
himself pronounced of this piece that "though his rhyme be ragged,
it hath in it some pith," (Colyn Cloute v. 54) did he overrate its
vigour and its weighty truth: Colyn Cloute not only shows that
fearlessness which on all occasions distinguished him, but evinces
a superiority to the prejudices of his age, in assailing abuses,
which, if manifest to his more enlightened contemporaries, few at
least had as yet presumed to censure.-In Why come ye not to Court
the satire is entirely personal, and aimed at the all-powerful
minister to whom the author had once humbly sued for preferment.
While throughout this remarkable poem, Skelton either overlooks or
denies the better qualities, the commanding talents, and the great
attainments of Wolsey, and even ungenerously taunts him with the
meanness of his origin; he fails not to attack his character and
conduct in those particulars against which a satirist might justly
declaim, and with the certainty that invectives so directed would
find an echo among the people. The regal pomp and luxury of the
Cardinal, his insatiate ambition, his insolent bearing at the
council-board, his inaccessibility to suitors, &c. &c. are dwelt
on with an intensity of scornful bitterness, and occasionally give
rise to vivid descriptions which history assures us are but little
exaggerated. Some readers may perhaps object, that in this poem
the satire of Skelton too much resembles the "oyster-knife that
hacks and hews," to which that of Pope was so unfairly
likened<99>; but all must confess that he wields his weapon with
prodigious force and skill; and we know that Wolsey writhed under
the wounds which it inflicted.

When Catullus bewailed the death of Lesbia's bird, he confined
himself to eighteen lines and truly golden lines; but Skelton,
while lamenting for the sparrow that was "slain at Carrow," has
engrafted on the subject so many far-sought. and whimsical
embellishments, that his epicede is really what the old editions
term it,-"a book." Phillip Sparrow exhibits such fertility and
delicacy of fancy, such graceful sportiveness, and such ease of
expression, that it might well be characterized by Coleridge as
"an exquisite and original poem."<100>

In The Tunning of Elynour Rumming, which would seem to have been
one of Skelton's most popular performances, we have a specimen of
his talent for the low burlesque;-a description of a real ale-
wife, and of the various gossips who keep thronging to her for
liquor, as if under the influence of a spell. If few compositions
of the kind have more coarseness or extravagance, there are few
which have greater animation or a richer humour.

The Garland of Laurel, one of Skelton's longest and most elaborate
pieces, cannot also be reckoned among his best. It contains,
however, several passages of no mean beauty, which show that he
possessed powers for the higher kind of poetry, if he had chosen
to exercise them; and is interspersed with some lyrical addresses
to the ladies who weave his chaplet, which are very happily
versified. In one respect the Garland of Laurel stands without a
parallel: the history of literature affords no second example of a
poet having deliberately written sixteen hundred lines in honour
of himself.

Skelton is to be regarded as one of the fathers of the English
drama. His Interlude of Virtue<101> and his Comedy called
Achademios<102> have perished: so perhaps has his
Necromancer;<103> but his Magnificence is still extant. To those
who carry their acquaintance with our early play-wrights no
farther back than the period of Peele, Greene, and Marlowe, this
"goodly interlude" by Skelton will doubtless appear heavy and
inartificial its superiority, however, to the similar efforts of
his contemporaries, is, I apprehend, unquestionable.<104> If our
author did not invent the metre which he uses in the greater
portion of his writings, and which is now known by the name
Skeltonical, he was certainly the first who adopted it in poems of
any length; and he employed it with a skill, which, after he had
rendered it popular, was beyond the reach of his numerous
imitators. "The Skeltonical short verse," observes Mr. D'Israeli,
speaking of Skelton's own productions, "contracted into five or
six, and even four syllables, is wild and airy. In the quick
returning rhymes, the playfulness of the diction, and the pungency
of new words, usually ludicrous, often expressive, and sometimes
felicitous, there is a stirring spirit which will be best felt in
an audible reading. The velocity of his verse has a carol of its
own. The chimes ring in the ear, and the thoughts are flung about 
like coruscations."<105>

Skelton has been frequently termed a Macaronic poet, but it may be
doubted if with strict propriety; for the passages in which he
introduces snatches of Latin and French are thinly scattered
through his works. "This anomalous and motley mode of
versification," says Warton, "is I believe supposed to be peculiar
to our author. I am not, however, quite certain that it originated
with Skelton." <106> He ought to have been "quite certain" that it
did not.<107>



NOTES TO SOME ACCOUNT OF SKELTON AND HIS WRITINGS.
1. Sometimes written Schelton: and Blomefield says, "That his Name
was Shelton or Skelton, appears from his Successor's Institution,
viz. '1529, 17 July, Thomas Clerk, instituted on the Death of John
Shelton, last Rector [Lib. Inst. No. 18.]'" Hist. of Norfolk, i.
20. ed. 1739.

2. "John Skelton was a younger branch of the Skeltons of Skelton
in this County [Cumberland]. I crave leave of the Reader,
(hitherto not having full instructions, and) preserving the
undoubted Title of this County unto him, to defer his character to
Norfolk, where he was beneficed at Diss therein." Fuller's
Worthies, p. 221 (Cumberland) ed. 1662. "John Skelton is placed in
this County [Norfolk] on a double probability. First, because an
ancient family of his name is eminently known long fixed therein.
Secondly, because he was beneficed at Dis," &c. Id. p. 257
(Norfolk).-"John Skelton . .. was originally, if not nearly,
descended from the Skeltons of Cumberland." Wood's Ath. Oxon. i.
49. ed. Bliss. See also Tanner's Biblioth. p. 675. ed. 1748.-"I
take it, that Skelton was not only Rector, but a Native of this
Place [Diss], being son of William Skelton, and Margaret his Wife,
whose Will was proved at Norwich, Nov. 7, 1512 [Regr. Johnson]."
Blomefield's Hist. of Norfolk, i. 20. ed. 1739. Through the active
kindness of Mr. Amyot, I have received a copy of the Will of
William Skelton (or Shelton,) who, though perhaps a relation, was
surely not the father of the poet; for in this full and explicit
document the name of John Skelton does not once occur.-From an
entry which will be afterwards cited, it would seem that the
Christian name of Skelton's mother was Johanna.-In Skelton's Latin
lines on the city of Norwich we find,

"Ah decus, ah patriae specie pulcherrima dudum!
Urbs Norvicensis," &c. 
("Oh splendour, oh most beautiful sight of my country,
City of Norfolk")

Does "patriae" mean his native county?

3. "Having been educated in this university, as Joh. Baleus
attests." Wood's Ath. Oxon. i. 50. ed. Bliss. Wood's reference in
the note is "In lib. De Scriptoribus Anglicis, MS. inter cod. MSS.
Selden, in bib. Bodl. p. 69 b." The printed copy of Bale's work
contains no mention of the place of Skelton's education. Part of
Bale's information concerning Skelton, as appears from the still
extant MS. collections for his Script. Illust. Brit., was received
"Ex Guilhelmo Horman," the author of the Vulgaria.-See also
Tanner's Biblioth. p. 675. ed. 1748.-Warton says that Skelton
"studied in both our universities." Hist. of E.P. ii. 336. ed.
4to.

4. "O Cambridge, parent of my soul, . . . to you I once was a dear
foster son."

5. "At Cambridge the Laureate Skelton first drank most piously
from the breast of learning."

6. "Wood reckons him of Ox. on the author. of Bale in a MS. in the
Bodleian Libr., but with much better reason he may be called ours;
for I find one Scheklton M.A. in the year 1484, at which time
allowing him to be 24 years of age, he must be at his death A.D.
1529, 68 or 69 years old, which 'tis probable he might be. v. Bale
653." Cole's Collections,-Add. MSS. (Brit. Mus.) 5880, p. 199.

7. I suspect that, during Skelton's lifetime, two of his most
celebrated pieces, Colyn Cloute and Why come ye not to court, were
not committed to the press, but wandered about in manuscript among
hundreds of eager readers. A portion of Speak, Parrot, and the
Poems Against Garnesche, are now for the first time printed.

8. No poetical antiquary can read the titles of some of the
lighter pieces mentioned in that catalogue,- such as The Ballad of
the Mustard Tart, The Mourning of the Maple-root (see Note 183 to
The Garland of Laurel)-without regretting their loss. "Many of the
songs or popular ballads of this time," observes Sir John Hawkins,
"appear to have been written by Skelton." Hist. of Music, iii, 39.

9. See Note 1 to The Death of the Earl of Northumberland.

10. He was only eleven years old at his father's death. See more
concerning the fifth earl in Percy's Preface to The Northumberland
Household Book, 1770, in Warton's Hist. of E. P. ii. 338. ed. 4to,
and in Collins's Peerage, ii. 304. ed. Brydges.-Warton says that
the Earl "encouraged Skelton to write this elegy," an assertion
grounded, I suppose, on the Latin lines prefixed to it.

11. A splendid MS. volume, consisting of poems (chiefly by
Lydgate), finely written on vellum, and richly illuminated, which
formerly belonged to the fifth earl, is still preserved in the
British Museum, MS. Reg. 18. D ii: at fol. 165 is Skelton's Elegy
on the Earl's father.

12. For a notice of Skelton's laureation at Oxford, the Rev. Dr.
Bliss obligingly searched the archives of that university, but
without success: "no records," he informs me, "remain between 1463
and 1498 that will give a correct list of degrees."

13. This work (a thin folio), translated by Caxton from the
French, is a prose romance founded on the Aeneid. It consists of
65 chapters, the first entitled "How the right puissant King
Priamus edified the great City of Troy," the last, "How Ascanius
held the realm of Italy after the death of Aeneas his father."
Gawin Douglas, in the Preface to his translation of Virgil's poem,
makes a long and elaborate attack on Caxton's performance;

"William Caxton had no compation
Of Virgil in that book he printed in prose,
Clepand it Virgil in Aeneados,
Quhilk that he says of French he did translate 
It has no thing ado therewith, God wot,
Nor no more like than the Devil and Saint Austin," &c.
Sig. B iii. ed. 1553.

14. A work probably never printed, and now lost: it is mentioned
by Skelton in the Garland of Laurel;

"Of Tully's Familiars the translation."
Garland of Laurel v. 1185

15. A work mentioned in the same poem;

"Diodorus Siculus of my translation
Out of fresh Latin into our English plain,
Recounting commodities of many a strange nation;
Who readeth it once would read it again;
Six volumes engrossed together it doth contain."
Garland of Laurel v. 1498

It is preserved in Ms. at Cambridge.

16. Sig. A ii.

17. For more about poet laureate, both in the ancient and modem
acceptation, see Selden's Titles of Honor, p. 405. ed. 1681; the
Abbe du Resnel's Recherches sur les Poètes Couronnez,-Hist. de
l'Acad. des Inscript. (Mém. de Litterature,) x. 507; Warton's
Hist. of E. P. ii. 129. ed. 4to; Malone's Life of Dryden, (Prose
Works,) p. 78; Devon's Introd. to Issue Roll of Thomas de
Brantingham, p. xxix., and his Introd. to Issues of the Exchequer,
&c., p. xiii.-Churchyard, in his verses prefixed. to Marshe's ed.
of Skelton's Works, 1568, says,

"Nay, Skelton wore the laurel wreath,
And passed in schools, ye know."

See Notices of Skelton from Various Sources.

18. Hist. of E. P. ii. 130, (note,) ed. 4to.-The second entry was
printed in 1736 by the Abbé du Resnel (who received it from Carte
the historian,) in Recherches sur les Poètes Couronez,-Hist. de
l'Acad. des Inscript. (Mém. de Littérature,) x. 522. Both entries
were given in 1767 by Farmer in the second edition of his Essay on
the Learning of Shakespeare, p. 50.-The Rev. Joseph Romilly,
registrar of the University of Cambridge, has obligingly
ascertained for me their correctness.

19. Prologue to Egloges, sig. A 1. ed. 1570.

20. Hist. of E. P. ii. 132 (note,) ed. 4to, where Warton gives the
subscription of the former as the title of the latter poem: his
mistake was occasioned by the reprint of Skelton's Works, 1736.

21. Du Resnel expressly says that he was made acquainted with the
Cambridge entry by "M. Carte, autrement M. Phillips." Recherches
sur les Poètes Couronnez,-Hist. de l'Acad. des Inscript. (Mém. de
Littérature,) x. 522.--Carte assumed the name of Phillips when he
took refuge in France.

22. A gentleman resident at Louvaine obligingly examined for me
the registers of that university, but could find in them no
mention of Skelton.

23. The original has "Cum:" but the initial letters of the lines
were intended to form a distich; see the conclusion of the poem.

24. Here again the original has "Cum."

25. From the 4to volume entitled Opusculum Roberti Whittintoni in
florentissima Oxoniensi achademia Laureati. ("A little work of
Robert Whittington Laureate of the most illustrious university of
Oxford") At the end, Expliciunt Roberti Whitintoni Oxonie
Protovatis Epygrammata una cum quibusdant Panegyricis. Impressa
Londini per me Wynandum de Worde. Anno post virginem partum. M.
ccccc xix. decimo vero kalendas Maii. ("The end of Robert
Whittington, first poet of Oxford's epigrams and eulogies. Printed
in London by me, Wynkyn de Worde, 10th May 1519")

26. Henry Bradshaw's Life of Saint Werburgh, 1. ii. c. 24. printed
by Pynson 1521, 4to.

27. See the two subscriptions already cited above; and Against
Venomous Tongues, A Replication, &c., Speak, Parrot v. 516;-
"Clarus & facundus in utroque scribendi genere, prosa atque metro,
habebatur." ("He will be famed for writing both clearly and
fluently") Bale, Script. Illust. Brit. &c. p. 651. ed. 1559.-
"Inter Rhetores regius orator factus." ("Made royal orator among
the rhetoricians") Pits, De Illust. Angl. Script. p. 701. ed.
1619. "With regard to the Orator Regius," says Warton, "I find one
John Mallard in that office to Henry the eighth, and his
epistolary secretary," &c. Hist. of E. P. ii. 132 (note), ed. 4to.

28. Register Hill 1489-1505, belonging to the Diocese of London.

29. 1st Oct.: see Sandford's Geneal. Hist. p. 475. ed. 1707.

30. See the Garland of Laurel, v. 1178.

31. Henry was created Duke of York 31st Octr. an. 10. Hen. vii.
[1494]; see Sandford's Geneal. Dist. p. 480. ed. 1707. See also
The Creation of Henry Duke of Yorke, &c. (from a Cottonian MS.) in
Lord Somers's Tracts, i. 24. ed. Scott.

32. Biblioth. p. 676. ed. 1748.

33. Creancer i.e. tutor: see Note 78 to Poems against Garnesche,-
When ladies attempt to write history, they sometimes say odd
things: e.g. "It is affirmed that Skelton had been tutor to Henry
[viii.] in some department of his education. How probable it is
that the corruption imparted by this ribald and ill living wretch
laid the foundation for his royal pupil's grossest crimes!" Lives
of the Queens of England by Agnes Strickland, vol. iv. 104.

34. After noticing that while Arthur was yet alive, Henry was
destined by his father to be archbishop of Canterbury, "it has
been remarked," says Mrs. Thomson, "that the instructions bestowed
upon Prince Henry by his preceptor, Skelton, were calculated to
render him a scholar and a churchman, rather than an enlightened
legislator." Mem. of the Court of Henry the Eighth, i. 2. But the
description of the Speculum Principis, quoted above, is somewhat
at variance with such a conclusion. The same lady observes in
another part of her work, "To Skelton, who in conjunction with
Giles Dewes, clerk of the library to Henry the Seventh, had the
honour of being tutor to Henry the Eighth, this king evinced his
approbation," ii. 590, and cites in a note the Epistle to Henry
the Eighth prefixed to Palsgrave's Leselarcissement de la Langue
Francoyse, 1530, where mention is made of "the singular clerk
master Gyles Dewes sometime instructor to your noble grace in this
self tongue." Though Dewes taught French to Henry, surely it by no
means follows that he was "his tutor in conjunction with Skelton:"
a teacher of French and a tutor are very different.

35. Biblioth. p. 676. ed. 1748.

36. "We have for the present dedicated these verses, like a gift
of playthings, to your childhood, and shall be ready with more
abundant offerings, when your virtues, growing with your age,
shall supply more abundant material for poetry. I would add my
exhortation to that end, were it not that you are of your own
accord already, as they say, under way with all sails set, and
have with you Skelton, that incomparable light and ornament of
British Letters, who can not only kindle your studies, but bring
them to a happy conclusion." (Francis Morgan Nichols.)

37. "Now comes the boy Henry, who rejoices in having his father's name,
guided to the sacred springs by the poet Skelton, he has trained himself
in the arts of Athena from his tenderest years" (Clarence Miller)-
Erasmi Opera, i. 1214, 1216, ed. 1703.-The Ode is appended to
Erasmus's Latin version of the Hecuba and Iphigenia in Aulide of
Euripides, printed by Aldus in 1507; and in that edition the
second line which I have quoted is found with the following
variation,

"Monstrante fonteis vate Laurigero sacros."
("guided to the sacred springs by the Laureate")

"It is probable," says Granger, "that if that great and good man
[Erasmus] had read and perfectly understood his [Skelton's]
'pithy, pleasant, and profitable works,' as they were lately
reprinted, he would have spoken of him in less honourable terms."
Biog. Hist. of Engl. i. 102. ed. 1775. The remark is sufficiently
foolish: in Skelton's works there are not a few passages which
Erasmus, himself a writer of admirable wit, must have relished and
admired; and it was not without reason that he and our poet have
been classed together as satirists, in the following passage; "By
what means could Skelton that laureate poet, or Erasmus that great
and learned clerk, have uttered their minds so well at large, as
through their cloaks of merry conceits in writing of toys and
foolish themes: as Skelton did by Speak Parrot, Ware the hawk, the
Tunning of Elynour Rumming, Why come ye not to Court? Philip
Sparrow, and such like: yet what greater sense or better matter
can be, than is in this ragged rhyme contained? Or who would have
heard his fault so plainly told him, if not in such gibing sort?
Also Erasmus, under his praise of Folly, what matters hath he
touched therein? "&c. The Golden Aphroditis, &c. by John Grange,
1577 (I quote from Censura Liter. vol. i. 382. ed. 1815.)

38. Thomas Morus i.e. Thomas More, then a student of Lincoln's
Inn.

39. The country-seat of Lord Mountjoy.

40. Probably Eltham.

41. "It was only a three days' task; but a task it was, for I had
for some years neither read nor written poetry; and it was
extorted from me partly by shame and partly by vexation. I was
staying at lord Mountjoy's country house when Thomas More came to
see me, and took me out with him for a walk as far as the next
village, where all the king's children, except prince Arthur, who
was then the eldest son, were being educated. When we came into
the hall, the attendants not only of the palace but also of
Mountjoy's household were all assembled. In the midst stood prince
Henry, then nine years old, and having already something of
royalty in his demeanour, in which there was a certain dignity
combined with singular courtesy. On his right was Margaret, about
eleven years of age, afterwards married to James, king of Scots ;
and on his left played Mary, a child of four. Edmund was an infant
in arms. More, with his companion Arnold, after paying his
respects to the boy Henry, the same that is now king of England,
presented him with some writing. For my part, not having expected
anything of the sort, I had nothing to offer, but promised that on
another occasion I would in some way declare my duty towards him.
Meantime I was angry with More for not having warned me,
especially as the boy sent me a little note, while we were at
dinner, to challenge something from my pen. I went home, and in
the Muses' spite, from whom I had been so long divorced, finished
the poem within three days." (Francis Morgan Nichols). Catal.
(Primus) Lucubrationum, p. 2. prefixed to the above-cited vol. of
Erasmi Opera.-In Turner's Hist. of the Reign of Henry the Eighth,
it is erroneously stated that Erasmus "had the interview which he
thus describes, at the residence if Lord Mountjoy." i. 11. ed.
8vo.

42. Lines prefixed to Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works,1568; see
Notices of Skelton.

43. "10th June in Westminster John Skelton commited to the prison
of the King's jailer" p. 30,-1592, 4to.

44. According to the xivth of the Merry Tales of Skelton he was
"long confined in prison at Westminster by the command of the
cardinal:" but the tract is of such a nature that we must hesitate
about believing a single statement which it contains. Even
supposing that at some period or other Skelton was really
imprisoned by Wolsey, that imprisonment could hardly have taken
place so early as 1502. As far as I can gather from his writings,
Skelton first offended Wolsey by glancing at him in certain
passages of Colyn Cloute, and in those passages the cardinal is
alluded to as being in the fulness of pomp and power.

45. "Johannne Skelton widow from our lord the King-3l. 6s. 8d." By
Writ of Privy Seal-Auditor's Calendar of Files from 1485 to 1522,
fol. 101 (b.), in the Public Record Office.

46. Ritson (Bibliog. Poet. p.102) says that Skelton was "chaplain
to king Henry the eighth:" qy. on what authority?

47. "He . . . was Rector and lived here [at Diss] in 1504 and in
1511, as I find by his being Witness to several Wills in this
year. (Note) 1504, The Will of Mary Cowper of Disse, Witnesses
Master John Skelton, Laureate, Parson of Disse, &c.' And among the
Evidences of Mr. Thomas Coggeshall, I find the House in the Tenure
of Master Skelton, Laureat. . . . Mr. Le-Neve says, that his
[Skelton's] Institution does not appear in the Books, which is
true, for often those that were collated by the Pope, had no
Institution from the Bishop, many Instances of which in those
Books occur; but it is certain from abundance of Records and
Evidences that I have seen, that he was Rector several years."
Blomefield's Hist. of Norfolk, i. 20. ed. 1739.-The parish-
register of Diss affords no information concerning Skelton; for
the earliest date which it contains is long posterior to his
death.

48. See Epitaph for John Clarke and Adam Udersall, who died in
1506; Lamentatio urbis Norvicen., written in 1507, and Chorus de
Dis, &c. in 1513.

49. I may notice here, that in an Assessment for a Subsidy, temp.
Henry viii., we find, under "Saint Helen's Parish within
Bishopsgate,"

"Mr. Skelton in goodes-xl. li."
Books of the Treasury of the Exchequer, B. 4. 15, fol. 7,-Public
Record Office. Qy. was this our author?

50. "Cum quibusdam blateronibus fraterculis, praecipue
Dominicanis, bellum gerebat continuum. Sub pseudopontifice
Nordovicensi Ricardo Nixo, mulierem illam, quam sibi secreto ob
Antichristi metum desponsaverat, sub concubine titulo custodiebat.
In ultimo tamen vitae articulo super ea re interrogatus,
respondit, se nusquam illam in conscientia coram Deo nisi pro
uxore legitima tenuisse . . . animam egit . . . relictis liberis."
("With these scandalmongering brothers, particularly the
Dominicans, he fought continually. While he was under the
authority of Richard Nix,the false-hearted bishop of Norwich, he
kept a woman under the guise of a concubine, whom he had however
secretly married for fear of the Devil. At the end of his life,
when he was asked about her, he replied, that in his conscience
and before God he regarded her as his lawful wife . . . (and that)
he gave up his soul . . . free of sin") Bale, Script. Illust.
Brit. pp. 651, 2. ed. 1559.-"In Monachos praesertim Praedicatores
S. Dominici saepe stylum acuit, & terminos praetergressus
modestiae, contra eos scommatibus acerbius egit. Quo facto suum
exasperavit Episcopum Richardum Nixum, qui habito de vita &
moribus eius examine, deprehendit hominem votam Deo castitatem
violasse, imo concubinam domi suae diu tenuisse." ("He often
sharpened his pen against the monks, especially the Dominicans,
and made vicious satires against them, passing the bounds of
decency. His works exasperated the Bishop Richard Nix so much that
he examined him about his morals and way of living, and condemned
him as a man who had broken the vow of chastity, and worse, kept a
concubine in his house") Pits, De Illust. Angl. Script. p. 701.
ed. 1619.-"The Dominican Friars were the next he contested with,
whose viciousness lay pat enough for his hand; but such foul
Lubbers fell heavy on all which found fault with them. These
instigated Nix, Bishop of Norwich, to call him to account for
keeping a Concubine, which cost him (as it seems) a suspension
from his benefice . . . We must not forget, how being charged by
some on his death-bed for begetting many children on the aforesaid
Concubine, he protested, that in his Conscience he kept her in the
notion of a wife, though such his cowardliness that he would
rather confess adultery (then accounted but a venial) than own
marriage, esteemed a capital crime in that age." Fuller's
Worthies, p. 257, (Norfolk,) ed. 1662.-Anthony Wood, with his
usual want of charity towards the sons of genius, says that
Skelton "having been guilty of certain crimes, (as most poets
are,) at least not agreeable to his coat, fell under the heavy
censure of Rich. Nykke bishop of Norwich his diocesan; especially
for his scoffs and ill language against the monks and Dominicans
in his writings." Ath. Oxon. i. 50. ed. Bliss, who adds in a note,
"Mr. Thomas Delafield in his MS. Collection of Poets Laureate, &c.
among Gough's MSS. in the Bodleian, says it was in return for his
being married, an equal crime in the ecclesiastics of those days,
bishop Nykke suspended him from his church."-Tanner gives as one
of the reasons for Skelton's taking sanctuary at Westminster
towards the close of his life, "propter quod uxorem habuit."
("because he had a wife") Biblioth. p. 675. ed. 1748.-In the
xiiith of the Merry Tales Skelton's wife is mentioned.

51. "Cui [Nixo] utcunque a nive nomen videatur inditum, adeo nihil
erat nivei in pectore, luxuriosis cogitationibus plurimum
aestuante, ut atro carbone libidines ejus notandae videantur, si
vera sunt quae de illo a Nevillo perhibentur." ("Who (Nix) however
pure his name might appear to be, there was nothing pure in his
heart, raging continually with lustful thoughts, so that if one
saw the truthful appearance, it would be coal-black with lustful
ideas and lechery.") Godwin De Praesul. Angl. p. 440. ed. 1743.

52. "In the Edition of his Works in 8vo. Lond. 1736, which I have,
at p. 272 he mentions Trumpinton, and seems to have been Curate
there, 5. Jan. 1507. At p. 54 he also mentions Swafham and Soham,
2 Towns in Cambridgeshire, in The Crown of Laurel." Cole's
Collections,-Add. MSS. (Brit. Mus.) 5880, p. 199. To conclude from
the mention of these towns that Skelton resided in Cambridgeshire
is the height of absurdity, as the reader will immediately
perceive on turning to the passage in question, Garland of Laurel,
v. 1416,-Chalmers, on the authority of a MS. note by Kennet, a
transcript of which had been sent to him, states that "in 1512,
Skelton was presented by Richard, abbot of Glastonbury, to the
vicarage of Dalting." Biog. Dict. xxviii. 45: if Chalmers had
consulted Wood's account of the poet, he might have learned that
the rector of Diss and the vicar of Dulting were different
persons.

53. The old ed. has "scripter."

54. "Written by Skelton, rector of Diss. The end, &c. Transcribed
in Trumpington by the curate of that place on the fifth of January
1507, (according to English reckoning)."

55. "I have sent you these little pages that I want you to copy
out, which are what they know I have written."

56. Ath. Oxon. i. 50. ed. Bliss.

57. Where see also the extracts from A c. (100) Merry Tales, &c.-
The biographer of Skelton, in Eminent Lit. and Scient. Men of
Great Britain, &c. (Lardner's Cyclop.), asserts that "he composed
his Merry Tales for the king and nobles"!! 1. 279.

58. Lines prefixed to Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568; see
Notices of Skelton

59. "Sith ye have me challenged, M[aster] Garnesche," Poems
Against Garnesche v. 1

60. In the Notes on the poems Against Garnesche I have cited
several parallel expressions from The Flyting of Dunbar and
Kennedy. That curious production may be found in the valuable
edition of Dunbar's Poems (ii. 65) by Mr. D. Laing, who supposes
it to have been written between 1492 and 1497 (ii. 420.) It
therefore preceded the "flyting "of Skelton and Garnesche. I may
add, that the last portion of our author's Speak, Parrot bears a
considerable resemblance to a copy of verses attributed to Dunbar,
and entitled A General Satire (Poems, ii. 24); and that as the
great Scottish poet visited England more than once, it is probable
that he and Skelton were personally acquainted.

61. At a later period there was a poetical "flyting" between
Churchyard and a person named Camel, who had attacked a
publication of the former called Davie Dicar's Dream; and some
other writers took a part in the controversy: these rare pieces
(known only by their titles to Ritson, Bibliog. Poet. p. 151, and
to Chalmers, Life of Churchyard, p. 53) are very dull and
pointless, but were evidently put forth in earnest.

62. In the first poem Against Garnesche he is called "Master:" but
see Note 7 to that poem.

63. Hall's Chron. (vi. year Hen. viii.) fol. xlviii. ed. 1548.

64. MS. Cott.. Calig. B. vi. fol. 112.

65. Auditor's Calendar of Files from 1485 to 1522, fol. 108 (b).

66. Privy Purse Accounts, A. 5. 16. p. 21.

67. "To Christopher Garnesche one of the King's gentlemen-ushers as
an annuity during the kings pleasure per year-10l.
To the same Christopher for his faithfulness 20l. per year until
the end of his life-20l." Auditor's Calendar, &c. fol. 162 (b).

68. Auditor's Patent Book, No. 1. fol. 6 (b).

69. In an account of the visit of the Emperor Charles the Fifth to
England in June 1522, among the lodgings which were occupied on
that occasion at Greenwich we find mention of "Master Garnyshe
house." See Rutland Papers, p. 82, (printed for the Camden
Society.) That a knight was frequently called "Master," I have
shewn in Note 7 to Poems Against Garnesche

70. Privy Purse Accounts, A. 5, 17. p. 175.

71. "Christopher Garnesche, soldier, for his annuity of 30l. on
the feast of St. Michael last; viz. for one whole year by the hand
of Richard Allen."Teller's Book, A. 8. 24. p. 293.5

72. To these notices of Garnesche I may add the following letter,
the original of which is in the possession of Mr. J. P. Collier:

"Please it your grace, we have received the King's most gracious
letters dated at his manor of Greenwich the xth day of April,
whereby we perceive his high pleasure is that we should take some
substantial direction for the preparation and furnishing of all
manner of victuals as well for man as for horse, to be had in
readiness against the coming of his grace, his nobles with their
train; Like it your grace, so it is we have not been in times past
so greatly and sore destitute this many years past of all manner
of victuals both for man and beast as we be now, not only by
reason of a great murrain of cattle which hath been in these
parts, but also for that the King's takers, lying about the
borders of the sea coast next adjoining unto us, have taken and
made provision thereof contrary to the old ordinance, so that we
be utterly destitute by reason of the same, and can in no wise
make any substantial provision for his highness nor his train in
these parts, for all the butchers in this town have not substance
of beefs and muttons to serve us, as we be accompanied at this
day, for the space of iii. weeks at the most. And also as now
there is not within this town of Calais fuel sufficient to serve
us one whole week, the which is the great danger and unsurety of
this the King's town. Wherefore we most humbly beseech your grace,
the premises considered, that we by your gracious and favorable
help may have not only remedy for our beefs and muttons with other
victuals, but also that all manner of victuallers of this town may
repair and resort with their ships from time to time to make their
purveyance of all manner of fuel from henceforth for this town
only, without any let or interruption of the King's officers or
takers, any commandment heretofore given to the contrary not
withstanding, for without that both the King's Highness, your
grace, and all this town shall be utterly disappointed and
deceived both of victuals and fuel, which God defend. At Calais
the xviiith day. of April,
By your servants,
John Peache,
William Sandys,
Edward Guldeferd,
Robert Wotton,
Christopher Garnesche.
To my Lord cardinal's grace, Legate a Latere and chancellor of
England."

In Proceed. and Ordin. of the Privy Council (vol. vii. 183, 196),
1541, mention is made of a Lady Garnesche (probably the widow of
Sir Christopher) having had a house at Calais; and in Privy Purse
Expenses of the Princess Mary (p. 120) we find under June 1543,
"Item my Lady Garnesche servant for bringing cherries xiid."

73. "Contra Skeltonum, Lib. i." Script. Illust. Brit. p. 723. ed.
1559.

74. fol 259. ed. 1570.

75. See Note 5 to The Tunning of Elynour Rumming. If this line
alludes to Skelton, it preserves a trait of his personal
appearance.

76. 4 sig. c. v. ed. 1570.

77. In a volume of various pieces by Gaguin, dated 1498, is a
treatise on metre, which shews no mean acquaintance with the
subject.

78. "Invectivam in Guil. Lilium, Lib. i." Script. Illust. Brit.
&c. p. 652. ed. 1559. The reader must not suppose from the
description, "Lib. i.," that the invective in question extended to
a volume: it was, I presume, no more than a copy of verses. Wood
mentions that this piece was "written in verse and very carping."
Ath. Ox. i. 52. ed. Bliss: but most probably he was acquainted
with it only through Bale. He also informs us (i. 34) that Lily
wrote a tract entitled "Apologia ad Joh. Skeltonum, Rob.
Whittington." for a copy of which I have sought in vain.

79. "I am compelled to strike against you, Lilly"

80. See Weever's Fun. Monum. p. 498. ed.1631; Stowe's Collections,
MS. Harl. 540. fol. 57; and Fuller's Worthies, (Norfolk,) p. 257.
ed. 1662. "And this," says Fuller, "I will do for W. Lilly,
(though often beaten for his sake,) endeavour to translate his
answer:

"With face so bold, and teeth so sharp,
Of viper's venom, why dost carp?
Why are my verses by thee weigh'd
In a false scale? may truth be said?
Whilst thou to get the more esteem
A learned Poet fain wouldst seem,
Skelton, thou art, let all men know it,
Neither learned, nor a Poet."

81. See Note 151 to The Garlansd of Laurel.

82. It was granted to him by the king for life.

83. Concerning this college, see Note 212 to The Garland of
Laurel.

84. "To the most honourable, most mighty, and by far the most
reverend father in Christ and in the Lord, Lord Thomas, etc., of
the title of the sacred Cecilian, presbyter of the Holy Roman
Church, the most deserving cardinal, Legate of the Apostolic See,
and the most illustrious legate a latere, etc., Skelton Laureate,
ora. reg., declares humble allegiance with all fit reverence due
to such a great and magnificent Chief of Priests, most equitable
moderator of all justice, and moreover the most excellent patron
of the present little book, etc., at whose most auspicious
contemplation, under the memorable seal of a glorious immortality,
the present little treatise is commended [or devised]."(PH)-A
Replication against certain young scholars abjured of late, &c.
vol. 1.230. In Typograph. Antiq. ii. 539. ed. Dibdin, where the 
Replication is described and quoted from Heber's copy, we are told
that it has "a Latin address to Thomas - who [sic] he [ Skelton]
calls an excellent patron," &c. That the editor should have read
the address without discovering that the said Thomas was Cardinal
Wolsey, is truly marvellous.

85. "To His Most Serene Royal Majesty, together with the Lord
Cardinal, the most honourable Legate a latere &c."

86. "Go, book, fall before the great King Henry VIII and worship
him, re-echoing his glories. Greet likewise, with reverence, the
great Cardinal, legate a Latere, and may he be mindful to sue for
the prebend which he promised to entrust to me some day, and give
me grounds to hope for his protection-between hope and fear."
(PH).

87. "I trust entirely in his good graces" (PH).

88. Animadversions upon the annotations and corrections of some
imperfections of impressions of Chaucer's Works, &c. p. 13, in
Todd's Illust. of Gower and Chaucer. I may notice here, that among
the Harleian MSS. (2252, fols. 156, 158) are two poems on the
Cardinal, which in the Catalogue of that collection Wanley has
described as "Skelton's libels; "but they are evidently not by
him.

89. Wolsey had previously been named a Cardinal in 1515.-Fiddes
(Life of Wolsey, p. 99. ed. 1726) says that he became Legate a
latere in 1516: but see State Papers (1830,) i. 9 (note.)
Lingard's Hist. of Engl. vi. 57. ed. 8vo, &c.-Hoping to ascertain
the exact date of the Replication, &c. (which contains the first
of the passages now under consideration,) I have consulted various
books for some mention of the "young heretics" against whom that
piece was written; but without success. [These were Thomas Bilney
and Thomas Arthur, Cambridge scholars who recanted their Lutheran
Protestantism and carried their faggot of repentance at St. Paul's
Cross on 29th September 1527. See
http://www.exclassics.com/foxe/foxe172.htm.]

90. We cannot settle this point by a comparison of old editions,
the poem against Albany and the two L'Envoys which follow it being
extant only in the ed. of Marshe.-It may be doubted, too, if the
L'Envoy which I have cited at above "Perge, liber," &c. belongs to
the Garland of Laurel, to which it is affixed in Marshe's edition
as a second L'Envoy: in Faukes's edition of that poem, which I
conceive to be the first that was printed, it is not found: the
Cott. MS. of the Garland is unfortunately imperfect at the end.

91. Chron. (Hen. viii.) fol. cx. ed. 1548.

92. "Ob literas quasdam in Cardinalem Vuolsium invectivas, ad
Vuestmonasteriense tandem asylum confugere, pro vita servanda,
coactus fuit: ubi nihilominus sub abbate Islepo favorem invenit."
("Because of these words insulting Cardinal Wolsey, he was forced,
in order to save his life, to seek sanctuary in Westminster: Where
he came under the protection of abbot Islip.")-Bale, Script.
Illust. Brit. p. 651. ed. 1559. "Ubi licet Abbatis Islepi favore
protegeretur, tamen vitam ibi, quantumvis antea incunde actam,
tristi exitu conclusit." ("Where he was protected by the goodwill
of abbot Islip; however his life there was such a contrast to what
he had before, that his end was a sad one."), Pits, De Illust.
Angl. Script. p. 701. ed. 1619.-"But Cardinal Wolsey (impar
congressus, betwixt a poor Poet and so potent a Prelate) being
inveighed against by his pen, and charged with too much truth, so
persecuted him, that he was forced to take Sanctuary at
Westminster, where Abbot Islip used him with much respect," &c.
Fuller's Worthies, (Norfolk,) p. 257. ed. 1662.-"He [Skelton] was
so closely pursued by his [Wolsey's] officers, that he was forced
to take sanctuary at Westminster, where he was kindly entertained
by John Islipp the abbot, and continued there to the time of his
death." Wood's Ath. Oxon. i. 51. ed. Bliss, who adds in a note;
"The original MS. register of this sanctuary, which must have been
a great curiosity, was in Sir Henry Spelman's library, and was
purchased at the sale of that collection by Wanley for Lord
Weymouth. MS. note in Wanley's copy of Nicholson's Historical
Library in the Bodleian."

93. John Islip was elected abbot in 1500, and died in 1532; see
Widmore's Hist. of West. Abbey, 119, 123. "John Skelton .... is
said by the late learned Bishop of Derry, Nicholson (Hist. Lib.
chap. 2.) to have first collected the Epitaphs of our Kings,
Princes, and Nobles, that lie buried at the Abbey Church of
Westminster: but I apprehend this to be no otherwise true, than
that, when he, to avoid the anger of Cardinal Wolsey, had taken
sanctuary at Westminster, to recommend himself to Islip, the Abbot
at that time, he made some copies of verses to the memories of
King Henry the Seventh and his Queen, and his mother the Countess
of Richmond, and perhaps some other persons buried in this
church." Account of Writers, &c. p. 5, appended to Widmore's
Enquiry into the time of the found. of West. Abbey.--Widmore is
mistaken: neither in Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568, nor in
the Reges, Reginae, Nobiles, &c., 1603, is there any copy of
verses by our author on the Queen of Henry the Seventh.

94. "De morte Cardinalis vaticinium edidit: & eius veritatem
eventus declaravit." (He prophesied the death of the cardinal, and
the truth of this was shown by events")-Bale, Script. Illust.
Brit. p. 652. ed. 1559.-"The word Vates being Poet or Prophet,
minds me of this dying Skelton's prediction, foretelling the ruin
of Cardinal Wolsey. Surely, one unskilled in prophecies, if well
versed in Solomon's Proverbs, might have prognosticated as much,
that Pride goeth before a fall." Fuller's Worthies, (Norfolk,) p.
257. ed. 1662.-Did not this anecdote originate in certain verses
of Colyn Cloute (v. 480 sqq)? See the fragment from Lansdown MSS.
in Note 67 to Colyn Cloute

95. "Vuestmonasterii tandem, captivitatis sua; tempore, mortuus
est: & in D. Margaritae sacello sepultus, cum hac inscriptione
alabastrica: Johannes Skeltonus, vates Pierius, hic situs est.
Animam egit 21 die Junii, anno Domini 1529, relictis liberis."
(For a long time imprisoned at Westminster; in time, he died; &
was buried in St Margaret's Chapel, with this inscription in
marble: John Skelton, poet and scholar, lies here. His soul
departed 21st day of June, 1529 AD")-Bale, Script. Illust. Brit.
p. 652. ed. 1559. See also Pits (De Illust. Angl. Script. p. 703.
ed. 1619) and Fuller (Worthies, (Norfolk), p. 257. ed. 1662,) who
give Joannes Sceltonus vates Pierius hic situs est as the whole of
Skelton's epitaph. Weever, however (Fun. Monum. p. 497. ed: 1631,)
makes "animam egit, 21 Junii 1529" a portion of it, and in a
marginal note substitutes "ejicit" for "egit," as if correcting
the Latinity!! So too Wood (Ath. Oxon. i. 52. ed. Bliss.) who
places "ejicit "between brackets after "egit," and states (what
the other writers do not mention) that the inscription was put on
the tomb "soon after" Skelton's death.

In the Church-Wardens' Accompts of St. Margaret's, Westminster
(Nichols's Illust. of Manners and Expences, &c. 4to. p. 9,) we
find this entry;

 						l. s d
"1529. Item, of Mr. Skelton for viii tapers . . 	0 2 8"

The institution of the person who succeeded Skelton as rector of
Diss is dated 17th July: See Note 1 above

96. e. g. the portrait on the title-page of Diverse Ballads and
Ditties Salacious (evidently from the press of Pynson;) is given
as a portrait of "Doctor Boorde" in the Book of Knowledge (see
reprint, sig. I); and (as Mr. F. R. Atkinson of Manchester
obligingly informed me by letter some years ago) the strange
fantastic figure on the reverse of the title-page of Faukes's ed.
of the Garland of Laurel, 1523 (poorly imitated in The Brit.
Bibliogr. iv. 389) is a copy of an early French print.

97. "Warton has undervalued him [Skelton]; which is the more
remarkable, because Warton was a generous as well as a competent
critic. He seems to have been disgusted with buffooneries, which,
like those of Rabelais, were thrown out as a tub for the whale;
for unless Skelton had written thus for the coarsest palates, he
could not have poured forth his bitter and undaunted satire in
such perilous times." Southey, Select Works of Brit. Poets,
(1831,} p. 61.

98. Amen. of Lit. ii. 69.

99. Satire should, like a polish'd razor, keen,
Wound with a touch that's scarcely felt or seen:
Thine is an oyster-knife that hacks and hews," &c.
Verses addressed to the imitator of the First Satire of the Second
Book of Horace (the joint composition of Lord Hervey and Lady M.
W. Montagu.)

100. Remains, ii. 163.

101. "Of Virtue also the sovereign interlude." Garland of Laurel,
v. 1177

102. "His comedy, Achademios called by name." Garland of Laurel,
v. 1184

103. See Notices of Skelton (last item)-Mr. Collier is mistaken in
supposing Skelton's "pageants that were played in Joyous Garde "to
have been dramatic compositions: see Note 185 to The Garland of
Laurel

104. A writer, of whose stupendous ignorance a specimen has been
already cited (See Note 57 above) informs us that Magnificence "is
one of the dullest plays in our language." Eminent Lit. and
Scient. Men of Great Britain, &c. (Lardner's Cyclop.) i. 281.

105. Amen. of Lit. ii. 69.

106. Hist. of E. P. ii. 356.

107. "In heaven bliss ye shall win to be
Among the blessed company omnium supernorum ("All that are in heaven")
There as is all mirth joy and glee
Inter agmina angelorum ("among the host of angels")
In bliss to abide."
Coventry Mysteries MS. Cott. Vesp. D. viii. Fol. 112.

A reprint of Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works having appeared in
1736, Pope took occasion, during the next year, to mention them in
the following terms,-casting a blight on our poet's reputation,
from which it has hardly yet recovered;

"Chaucer's worst ribaldry is learn'd by rote,
And beastly Skelton Heads of Houses quote"

Note-"Skelton, Poet Laureate to Hen. 8. a Volume of whose, Verses
has been lately reprinted, consisting almost wholly of Ribaldry,
Obscenity, and Billingsgate Language." The First Epistle of the
Second Book of Horace imitated, 1737. But Pope was unjust to
Skelton; for, though expressions of decided grossness occur in his
writings, they are comparatively few; and during his own time, so
far were such expressions from being regarded as offensive to
decency, that in all probability his royal pupil would not have
scrupled to employ them in the presence of Anne Boleyn and her
maids of honour.



MERRY TALES OF SKELTON.

MERRY TALES
Newly Imprinted
& made by Master Skelton
Poet
Laureate.

Imprinted at London
in Fleetstreet beneath the
Conduit at the sign of S.
John Evangelist,
by Thomas
Colwell.
[12mo. n. d.]

Here beginneth certain Merry tales of Skelton, poet laureate.

How Skelton came late home to Oxford from Abingdon. [Tale i.]

Skelton was an Englishman born as Scoggin was, and he was educated
and brought up in Oxford: and there was he made a poet laureate.
And one time he had been at Abington to make merry, where that he
had eat salt meats, and he did come late home to Oxford, and he
did lie in an inn named The Tabor which is now the Angel, and he
did drink, and went to bed. About midnight he was so thirsty or
dry that he was constrained to call to the tapster for drink, and
the tapster heard him not. Then he cried to his hosts and his
hostess, and to the ostler, for drink; and no man would hear him:
"Alack", said Skelton, "I shall perish for lack of drink! What
remedy?" At the last he did cry out and said, "Fire, fire, fire!"
When Skelton heard every man bustled himself upward, and some of
them were naked, and some half asleep and amazed, Skelton did cry,
"Fire, fire!" still, that every man knew not whither to resort;
Skelton did go to bed, and the host and hostess, and the tapster
with the ostler, did run to Skelton's chamber with candles lighted
in their hands, saying, "Where, where, where is the fire?" "Here,
here, here," said Skelton, and pointed his finger to his mouth,
saying, "Fetch me some drink to quench the fire and the heat and
the dryness in my mouth:" and so they did. Wherefore it is good
for every man to help his own self in time of need with some
policy or craft, so be it there be no deceit nor falsehood used.

How Skelton dressed the Kendal man in the sweat time. [Tale ii]

On a time Skelton rolled from Oxford to London with a Kendal man,
and at Uxbridge they baited. The Kendal man laid his cap upon the 
board in the Hall, and he went to serve his horse. Skelton took
the Kendal man's cap, and did put betwixt the lining and the utter
side a dish of butter: and when the Kendal man had dressed his
horse, he did come in to dinner, and did put on his cap (that time
the sweating sickness was in all England); at the last, when the
butter had taken heat of the Kendal man's head, it did begin to
run over his face and about his cheeks. Skelton said, "Sir, you
sweat sore: beware that you have not the sweating sickness." The
Kendal man said, "By the mysse, Ise wrang; I bus go till bed."
Skelton said, "I am skilled in physic, and specially in the
sweating sickness, that I will warrant any man." "In gewd faith,"
said the Kendal man "do see, and Ise bay for your skott to
London." Then said Skelton, "Get you a kerchief, and I will bring
you abed:" the which was done. Skelton caused the cap be sod in
hot lye, and dried it: in the morning Skelton and the Kendal man
did ride merrily to London.

How Skelton told the man that Christ was very busy in the woods
with them that made faggots. [Tale iii.]

When Skelton did come to London, there were many men at the table
at dinner. Amongst all other there was one said to Skelton, "Be
you of Oxford or Cambridge a scholar?" Skelton said, "I am of
Oxford." "Sir," said the man, "I would put you a question: do you
know well that after Christ did rise from death to life, it was
xl. days after ere he did ascend into heaven, and he was but
certain times with his disciples, and when that he did appear to
them, he did never tarry long amongst them, but suddenly vanished
from them; I would fain know" (saith the man to Skelton) "where
Christ was all those xl. days." "Where he was," saith Skelton,
"God knoweth; he was very busy in the woods among his labourers,
that did make faggots to burn heretics, and such as thou art the
which dost ask such diffuse questions: but now I will tell thee
more; when he was not with his mother and his disciples, he was in
Paradise, to comfort the holy patriarchs' and prophets' souls, the
which before he had fetched out of hell. And at the day of his
ascension, he took them all up with him into heaven."

How the Welshman did desire Skelton to aid him in his suit to the
King for a patent to sell drink. [Tale iv. ]

Skelton, when he was in London, went to the King's court, and
where there did come to him a Welshman, saying, "Sir, it is so,
that many doth come up of my country to the King's court, and some
doth get of the King by patent a castle, and some a park, and some
a forest, and some one fee and some another, and they do live like
honest men; and I should live as honestly as the best, if I might
have a patent for good drink: wherefore I do pray you to write a
few words for me in a little bill to give the same to the King's
hands, and I will give you well for your labour." "I am
contented," said Skelton. "Sit down then," said the Welshman, "and
write." "What shall I write?" said Skelton. The Welshman said,
"Write drink. Now," said the Welshman, "write, more drink." "What
now?" said Skelton. "Write now, a great deal of drink. Now," said
the Welshman, "put to all this drink a little crumb of bread, and
a great deal of drink to it," and read once again. Skelton did
read, "Drink, more drink, and a great deal of drink, and a little
crumb of bread, and a great deal of drink to it." Then the
Welsheman said, "Put out the little crumb of bread, and set in,
all drink, and no bread: and if I might have this signed of the
King, said the Welshman, I care for no more as long as I do live.
" "Well then," said Skelton, "when you have this signed of the
King, then will I labour for a patent to have bread, that you with
your drink, and I with the bread, may fare well, and seek our
living with bag and staff."

Of Swanborne the knave, that was buried under St. Peter's wall in
Oxford. [Tale v. ]

There was dwelling in Oxford a stark knave, whose name was
Swanborn; and he was such a notable knave that, if any scholar had
fallen out th'one with th'other, the one would call th'other
Swanborn, the which they did take for a worse word than knave. His
wife would divers times in the week comb his head with a three-
footed stool: then he would run out of the doors weeping, and if
any man had asked him what he did ail, other while he would say he
had the megrim in his head, or else, there was a great smoke
within the house: and if the doors were shut, his wife would beat
him under the bed, or into the bench hole, and then he would look
out at the cat hole; then would his wife say, "Lookest thou out,
whoreson?" "Yea," would he say, "thou shalt never let me of my
manly looks." Then with her distaff she would poke in at him. I
knew him when that he was a boy in Oxford; he was a little old
fellow, and would lie as fast as a horse would trot. At last he
died, and was buried under the wall of S. Peter's church. Then
Skelton was desired to make an epitaph upon the church wall, and
did write with a roll, saying,

Beelzebub his soul save,
Qui iacet hic hec ("who lies here") a knave:
Iam scio mortuus est, ("For I know he is dead")
Et iacet hic hec a beast:
Sepultus est ("he is buried") among the weeds: 
God forgive him his misdeeds!

How Skelton was complained on to the bishop of Norwich. [Tale vi.]

Skelton did keep a musket at Diss, upon the which he was
complained on to the bishop of Norwich. The bishop sent for
Skelton. Skelton did take two capons, to give them for a present
to the bishop. And as soon as he had saluted the bishop, he said,
"My lord, here I have brought you a couple of capons. The bishop
was blind, and said, "Who be you?" "I am Skelton," said Skelton.
The bishop said, "A whore head! I will none of thy capons: thou
keepest unhappy rule in thy house, for the which thou shalt be
punished." "What," said Skelton, "is the wind at that door?" and
said, "God be with you, my lord!" and Skelton with his capons went
his way. The bishop sent after Skelton to come again. Skelton
said, "What, shall I come again to speak with a mad man?" At last
he returned to the bishop, which said to him, "I would," said the
bishop, "that you should not live such a slanderous life, that all
your parish should not wonder and complain on you as they done: I
pray you amend, and hereafter live honestly, that I hear no more
such words of you; and if you will tarry dinner, you shall be
welcome; and I thanke you, said the bishop, for your capons."
Skelton said, "My lord, my capons have proper names; the one is
named Alpha, the other is named Omega: my lord," said Skelton,
"this capon is named Alpha, this is the first capon that I did
ever give to you; and this capon is named Omega, and this is the
last capon that ever I will give you: and so fare you well," said
Skelton.

How Skelton, when he came from the bishop, made a sermon.[Tale
vii.]

Skelton the next Sunday after went into the pulpit to preach, and
said, "Vos estis, vos estis, that is to say, You be, you be. And
what be you?" said Skelton: "I say, that you be a sort of knaves,
yea, and a man might say worse than knaves; and why, I shall show
you. You have complained of me to the bishop that I do keep a fair
wench in my house: I do tell you, if you had any fair wives, it
were some what to help me at need; I am a man as you be: you have
foul wives, and I have a fair wench, of the which I have begotten
a fair boy, as I do think, and as you all shall see. Thou wife,"
said Skelton, "that hast my child, be not afraid; bring me hither
my child to me:" the which was done. And he, showing his child
naked to all the parish, said, "How say you, neighbours all? is
not this child as fair as is the best of all yours? It hath nose,
eyes, hands, and feet, as well as any of your: it is not like a
pig, nor a calf, nor like no fowl nor no monstrous beast. If I
had," said Skelton, "brought forth this child without arms or
legs, or that it were deformed, being a monstrouus thing, I would
never have blamed you to have complained to the bishop of me; but
to complain without a cause, I say, as I said before in my
antetheme, vos estis, you be, and have be, and will and shall be
knaves, to complain of me without a cause reasonable. For you be
presumptuous, and do exalt yourselves, and therefore you shall be
made low: as I shall show you a familiar example of a parish
priest, the which did make a sermon in Rome. And he did take that
for his antetheme, the which of late days is named a theme, and
said, Qui se exaltat humiliabitur, et qui see humiliat
exaltabitur, that is to say, he that doth exalt himself or doth
extol himself shall be made meek, and he that doth humble himself
or is meek, shall be exalted, extolled, or elevated, or
sublimated, or such like; and that I will show you by this my cap.
This cap was first my hood, when that I was student in Jucalico,
and then it was so proud that it would not be contented, but it
would slip and fall from my shoulders. I perceiving this that he
was proud, what then did I? shortly to conclude, I did make of him
a pair of breeches to my hose, to bring him low. And when that I
did see, know, or perceive that he was in that case, and allmost
worn clean out, what did I then to extol him up again? you all may
see that this my cap was made of it that was my breeches.
Therefore, said Skelton, vos estis, therefore you be, as I did say
before: if that you exalt yourself, and cannot be contented that I
have my wench still, some of you shall wear horns; and therefore
vos estis: and so farewell." It is merry in the hall, when beards
wag all.

How the friar asked leave of Skelton to preach at Diss, which
Skelton would not grant. [Tale viii.]

There was a friar the which did come to Skelton to have licence to
preach at Diss. What would you preach there? said Skelton: do not
you think that I am sufficient to preach there in mine own cure?
Sir, said the friar, I am the limiter of Norwich, and once a year
one of our place doth use to preach with you, to take the devotion
of the people; and if I may have your good will, so be it, or else
I will come and preach against your will, by the authority of the
bishop of Rome, for I have his bulls to preach in every place, and
therefore I will be there on Sunday next coming." "Come not there,
friar, I do counsel thee," said Skelton. The Sunday next following
Skelton laid watch for the coming of the friar: and as soon as
Skelton had knowledge of the friar, he went into the pulpit to
preach. At last the friar did come into the church with the bishop
of Rome's bulls in his hand. Skelton then said to all his parish,
"See, see, see," and pointed to the friar. All the parish gazed on
the friar. Then said Skelton, "Masters, here is as wonderful a
thing as ever was seen: you all do know that it is a thing daily
seen, a bull doth beget a calf; but here, contrary to all nature,
a calf hath gotten a bull; for this friar, being a calf, hath
gotten a bull of the bishop of Rome." The friar, being ashamed,
would never after that time presume to preach at Diss.

How Skelton handled the friar that would needs lie with him in his
inn. [Tale ix.]

As Skelton rid into the country, there was a friar that hapened in
at an alehouse whereas Skelton was lodged, and there the friar did
desire to have lodging. The alewife said, "Sir, I have but one bed
whereas Master Skelton doth lie." "Sir", said the friar, "I pray
you that I may lie with you." Skelton said, "Master friar, I do
use to have no man to lie with me." "Sir," said the friar, "I have
lain with as good men as you, and for my money I do look to have
lodging as well as you." "Well," said Skelton, "I do see then that
you will lie with me." "Yea, Sir," said the friar. Skelton did
fill all the cups in the house, and whittled the friar, that at
the last, the friar was in mine eame's peason. Then said Skelton,
"Master friar, get you to bed, and I will come to bed within a
while." The friar went, and did lie upright, and snorted like a
sow. Skelton went to the chamber, and did see that the friar did
lie so; said to the wife, "Give me a washing beetle. Skelton then
cast down the clothes, and the friar did lie stark naked: then
Skelton did shite upon the friars navel and belly; and then he did
take the washing beetle, and did strike an hard stroke upon the
navel and belly of the friar, and did put out the candle, and went
out of the chamber. The friar felt his belly, and smelt a foul
savour, had thought he had been gored, and cried out and said,
"Help, help, help, I am killed!" They of the house with Skelton
went into the chamber, and asked what the friar did ail. The friar
said, "I am killed, one hath thrust me in the belly." "Fo," said
Skelton, "thou drunken soul, thou dost lie; thou hast beshitten
thyself. Fo," said Skelton, "let us go out of the chamber, for the
knave doth stink. The friar was ashamed, and cried for water. "Out
with the whoreson," said Skelton, "and wrap the sheets together,
and put the friar in the hog sty, or in the barn." The friar said,
"give me some water into the barn: and there the friar did wash
himself, and did lie there all the night long. The chamber and the
bed was dressed, and the sheets shifted; and then Skelton went to
bed.

How the cardinal desired Skelton to make an epitaph upon his
grave. [Tale x.]

Thomas Wolsey, cardinal and archbishop of York, had made a regal
tomb to lie in after he was dead: and he desired Master Skelton to
make for his tomb an epitaph, which is a memorial to show the life
with the acts of a noble man. Skelton said, "If it do like your
grace, I can not make an epitaph unlesse that I do see your tomb.
The cardinal said, I do pray you to meet with me tomorrow at the
West Monastery, and there shall you see my tomb a-making. The
appointment kept, and Skelton, seing the sumptuous cost, more
pertaining for an emperor or a maximus king, than for such a man
as he was (although cardinals will compare with kings), "Well,"
said Skelton, "if it shall like your grace to creep into this tomb
while you be alive, I can make an epitaph; for I am sure that when
that you be dead you shall never have it." The which was verified
of truth.

How the ostler did bite Skelton's mare under the tail, for biting
him by the arm. [Tale xi.]
Skelton used much to ride on a mare; and on a time he happened
into an inn, where there was a folish ostler. Skelton said,
"Ostler, hast thou any mare's bread?" "No, Sir," said the ostler:
"I have good horse bread, but I have no mare's bread." Skelton
said, "I must have mare's bread." "Sir," said the ostler, "there
is no mare's bread to get in all the town." "Well," said Skelton,
"for this once, serve my mare with horse bread." In the mean time
Skelton commanded the ostler to saddle his mare; and the osteler
did gird the mare hard, and the ostler was in his jerkin, and his
shirt sleeves were above his elbows, and in the girding of the
mare hard the mare bit the ostler by the arm, and bit him sore.
The was angry, and did bite the mare under the tail, saying, "A
whore, is it good biting by the bare arm?" Skelton said then,
"Why, fellow, hast thou hurt my mare?" "Yea," said the ostler, "ka
me, ka thee: if she do hurt me I will displease her."

How the cobbler told Master Skelton, it is good sleeping in a
whole skin. [Tale xii.]

In the parish of Diss, whereas Skelton was parson, there dwelled a
cobbler, being half a souter, which was a tall man and a great
sloven, otherwise named a slouch. The King's majesty having wars
beyond the sea, Skelton said to this aforesaid doughty man,
"Neighbour, you be a tall man, and in the King's wars you must
bear a standard." "A standard!" said the cobbler, "what a thing is
that?" Skelton said, "It is a great banner, such a one as thou
dost use to bear in Rogation week; and a lord's, or a knight's, or
a gentleman's arms shall be upon it; and the soldiers that be
under the aforesaid persons fighting under thy banner."
"Fighting!" said the cobbler; "I can no skill in fighting." "No,"
said Skelton, "thou shalt not fight, but hold up, and advance the
banner." "By my fay," said the cobbler, "I can no skill in the
matter." "Well," said Skelton, "there is no remedy but thou shalt
forth to do the King's service in his wars, for in all this
country there is not a more likelier man to do such a feat as thou
art." "Sir," said the cobbler, "I will give you a fat capon, that
I may be at home." "No," said Skelton, "I will not have none of
thy capons; for thou shalt do the King service in his wars."
"Why," said the cobbler, "what should I do? will you have me to go
in the King's wars, and to be killed for my labour? then I shall
be well at ease, for I shall have my mends in mine own hands."
"What, knave," said Skelton, "art thou a coward, having so great
bones?" "No," said the cobbler, "I am not afeared: it is good to
sleep in a whole skin." "Why," said Skelton, "thou shalt be
harnessed to keep away the strokes from thy skin." "By my fay,"
said the cobbler, "if I must needs forth, I will see how Ich shall
be ordered." Skelton did harness the doughty squirrel, and did put
an helmet on his head; and when the helmet was on the cobbler's
head, the cobbler said, "What shall those holes serve for?"
Skelton said, "Holes to look out to see thy enemies." "Yea," said
the cobbler, "then am I in worser case then ever I was; for then
one may come and thrust a nail into one of the holes, and prick
out mine eye. Therefore," said the cobbler to Master Skelton, "I
will not go to war: my wife shall go in my stead, for she can
fight and play the devil with her distaff, and with stool, staff,
cup, or candlestick; for, by my fay, Ich am sick; Ich'ill go home
to bed; I think I shall die."

How Master Skelton's miller deceived him many times by playing the
thief, and how he was pardoned by Master Skelton, after the
stealing away of a priest out of his bed at midnight. [Tale xiii.]

When Master Skelton did dwell in the country, he was agreed with a
miller to have his corn ground toll free; and many times when his
maiden[s] should bake, they wanted of their meal, and complained
to their mistress that they could not make their stint of bread.
Mistress Skelton, being very angry, told her husband of it. Then
Master Skelton sent for his miller, and asked him how it chanced
that he deceived him of his corn. "I!" said John miller; "nay,
surely I never deceived you; if that you can prove that by me, do
with me as you list." "Surely," said Skelton, "if I do find thee
false any more, thou shalt be hanged up by the neck." So Skelton
apointed one of his servants to stand at the mill while the corn
was a-grinding. John miller, being a notable thief, would fain
have deceived him as he had done before, but being afraid of
Skelton's servant, caused his wife to put one of her children into
the mill dam, and to cry, "Help, help, my child is drowned!" With
that, John miller and all went out of the mill; and Skelton's
servant, being diligent to help the child, thought not of the
meal, and the while the miller's boy was ready with a sack, and
stole away the corn; so when they had taken up the child, and all
was safe, they came in again; and so the servant, having his
grist, went home mistrusting nothing; and when the maids came to
bake again, as they did before, so they lacked of their meal
again. Master Skelton called for his man, and asked him how it
chanced that he was deceived; and he said that he could not tell,
For I did your commandment. And then Master Skelton sent for the
miller, and said, "Thou hast not used me well, for I want of my
meal." "Why, what would you have me do?" said the miller; "you
have set your own man to watch me." "Well, then," said Skelton,
"if thou dost not tell me which way thou hast played the thief
with me, thou shalt be hanged." "I pray you be good master unto
me, and I will tell you the truth: your servant would not from my
mill, and when I saw none other remedy, I caused my wife to put
one of my children into the water, and to cry that it was drowned;
and whiles we were helping of the child out, one of my boys did
steal your corn." "Yea," said Skelton, "if thou have such pretty
fetches, you can do more than this; and therefore, if thou dost
not one thing that I shall tell thee, I will follow the law on
thee." "What is that?" said the miller. "If that thou dost not 
steal my cup of the table, when I am set at meat, thou shalt not
escape my hands." "O good master," said John miller, "I pray you
forgive me, and let me not do this; I am not able to do it." Thou
shalt never be forgiven," said Skelton, "without thou dost it."
When the miller saw no remedy, he went and charged one of his
boys, in an evening (when that Skelton was at supper) to sette
fire in one of his hog-sties, far from any house, for doing any
harm. And it chanced, that one of Skelton's servants came out, and
spied the fire, and he cried, "Help, help! for all that my master
hath is like to be burnt." His master, hearing this, rose from his
supper with all the company, and went to quench the fire; and the
while John miller came in, and stole away his cup, and went his
way. The fire being quickly slaked, Skelton came in with his
friends, and reasoned with his friends which way they thought the
fire should come; and every man made answer as they thought good.
And as they were resoning, Skelton called for a cup of beer; and
in no wise his cup which he used to drink in would not be found.
Skelton was very angry that his cup was missing, and asked which
way it should be gone; and no man could tell him of it. At last he
bethought him of the miller, and said, "Surely, he, that thief,
hath done this deed, and he is worthy to be hanged." And he sent
for the miller: so the miller told him all how he had done.
"Truly," said Skelton, "thou art a notable knave; and without thou 
canst do me one other feat, thou shalt die." "O good master," said
the miller, "you promised to pardon me, and will you now break
your promise?" "Aye," said Skelton; "without thou canst steal the
sheets of my bed, when my wife and I am asleep, thou shalt be
hanged, that all such knaves shall take ensample by thee." "Alas,"
said the miller, "which way shall I do this thing? it is
unpossible for me to get them while you be there." "Well," said
Skelton, "without thou do it, thou knowest the danger." The miller
went his ways being very heavy, and studied which way he might do
this deed. He having a little boy, which knew all the corners of
Skelton's house and where he lay, upon a night when they were all
busy, the boy crept in under his bed, with a pot of yeast; and
when Skelton and his wife were fast asleep, he all anointed the
sheets with yeast, as far as he could reache. At last Skelton
awaked, and felt the sheets all wet; waked his wife, and said,
"What, hast thou beshitten the bed?" and she said, "Nay, it is you
that have done it, I think, for I am sure it is not I." And so
there fell a great strife between Skelton and his wife, thinking
that the bed had been beshitten; and called for the maid to give
them a clean pair of sheets. And so they arose, and the maid took
the foul sheets and threw them underneath the bed, thinking the
next morning to have fetched them away. The next time the maids
should go to washing, they looked all about, and could not find
the sheets; for Jacke the miller's boy had stolen them away. Then
the miller was sent for again, to know where the sheets were
become: and the miller told Master Skelton all how he devised to
steal the sheets. "How say ye?" said Skelton to his friends; is
not this a notable thief? Is he not worthy to be hanged that can
do these deeds?" "O good master," quoth the miller, "Now forgive
me according to your promise; for I have done all that you have
commanded me, and I trust now you will pardon me." "Nay," quoth
Skelton, "thou shalt do yet one other feat, and that shall be
this; thou shalt steal master parson out of his bed at midnight,
that he shall not know where he is become." The miller made great
moan and lamented, saying, "I can not tell in the world how I
shall do, for I am never able to do this feat." "Well," said
Skelton, "thou shalt do it, or else thou shalt find no favour at
my hands; and therefore go thy way." The miller being sorry,
devised with himself which way he might bring this thing to pass.
And ii. or iii. nights after, gathered a number of snails, and
agreed with the sexton of the church to have the key of the church
door, and went into the church between the hours of xi. and xii.
in the night, and took the snails, and lighted a sort of little
wax candles, and set upon every snail one, and the snails crept
about the church with the same candles upon their backs and then
he went into the vestry, and put a cope upon his back, and stood
very solemnly at the high altar with a book in his hand; and
afterward tolled the bell, that the priest lying in the churchyard
might hear him. The priest, hearing the bell toll, started out of
his sleep, and looked out of his window, and saw such a light in
the church, was very much amazed, and thought surely that the
church had been on fire, and went for to see what wonder it should
be. And when he came there, he found the church door open, and
went up into the choir; and see the miller standing in his
vestments, and a book in his hand, praying devoutly, and all the
lights in the church, thought surely with himself it was some
angel come down from heaven, or some other great miracle, blessed
himself and said, "In the name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, what art thou that standest here in this holy place?"
"O," said the miller, "I am saint Peter, which keep the keys of
heaven gate, and thou knowest that none can enter into heaven
except I let him in; and I am sent out from heaven for thee." "For
me!" quoth the priest: "good saint Peter, worship may thou be! I
am glad to hear that news. Because thou hast done good deeds, said
the miller, and served God, he hath sent for thee afore doomsday
come, that thou shalt not know the troubles of the world." "O,
blessed be God!" said the priest; I am very well contented for to
go: yet if it would please God to let me go home and distribute
such things as I have to the poor, I would be very glad." "No,"
said the miller; "if thou dost delight more in thy goods then in
the joys of heaven, thou art not for God; therefore prepare
thiself, and get into this bag which I have brought for thee." The
miller having a great quarter sack, the poor priest went into it,
thinking verily he had gone to heaven, yet was very sorry to part
from his goods; asked saint Peter how long it would be ere he came
there. The miller said he should be there quickly; and in he got
the priest, and tied up the sack, and put out the lights, and
layed every thing in their place, and took the priest on his back,
and locked the church doors, and to go: and when he came to go
over the church stile, the priest was very heavy, and the miller
cast him over the stile that the priest cried "oh." "Oh good saint 
Peter," said the priest, "whither go I now?" "Oh," said the
miller, these be the pangs that you must abide before you come to
heaven." "Oh," quoth the priest, "I would I were there once!" Up
he got the priest again, and caried him till he came to the top of
an high hill, a little from his house, and cast him down the hill,
that his head had many shrewd raps, that his neck was almost
burst. "O good saint Peter," said the priest, "where am I now?"
"You are almost now at heaven;" and carried him with much ado,
till he came to his own house, and then the miller threw him over
the threshold. "O good saint Peter," said the priest, "where am I
now? this is the sorest pang that ever I bid. O, said the miller,
give God thanks that thou hast had patience to abide all this
pain, for now thou art going up into heaven;" and tied a rope
about the sack, and drew him up to the top of the chimney, and
there let him hang. "O good S. Peter, tell me now where I am,"
said the priest. "Mary," said he, "thou art now in the top of John
miller's chimney." "A vengeance on thee, knave!" said the priest:
"hast thou made me believe al this while that I was going up into
heaven? well, Now I am here, an ever I come down again, I will
make thee to repent it." But John miller was glad that he had
brought him there. And in the morning the sexton rang all in to
service; and when the people were come to church, the priest was
lacking. The parish asked the sexton where the priest was; and the
sexton said, "I can not tell:" then the parish sent to Master
Skelton, and told how their priest was lacking to say them
service. Master Skelton marvelled at that, and bethought him of
the crafty doing of the miller, sent for John miller; and when the
miller was come, Skelton said to the miller, "Canst thou tell
where the parish priest is?" The miller up and told him all
together how he had done. Master Skelton, considering the matter,
said to the miller, "Why, thou unreverent knave, hast thou hauled
the poor priest on this fashion, and put on the holy ornaments
upon a knave's back? thou shalt be hanged, an it cost me all the
goods I have." John miller fell upon his knees, and desired Master
Skelton to pardon him; "For I did nothing," said the miller, "but
that you said you would forgive me. "Nay, not so," said Skelton;
"but if thou canst steal my gelding out of my stable, my two men
watching him, I will pardon thee; and if they take thee, they
shall strike off thy head;" for Skelton thought it better that
such a false knave should lose his head than to live. Then John
miller was very sad, and bethought him how to bring it to pass.
Then he remembered that there was a man left hanging upon the
gallows the day before, went privily in the night and took him
down, and cut off his head, and put it upon a pole, and broke a
hole into the stable, and put in a candle lighted, thrusting in
the head a little and a little. The men watching the stable,
seeing that, got themselves near to the hole (thinking that it was
his head), and one of them with his sworde cut it of. Then they
for gladness presented it unto their master, leaving the stable
door open: then John miller went in, and stole away the gelding.
Master Skelton, looking upon the head, saw it was the thief's head
that was left hanging upon the gallows, said, "Alas, how oft hath
this false knave deceived us! Go quickly to the stable again, for
I think my gelding is gone." His men, going back again, found it
even so. Then they came again , and told their master his horse
was gone. "Ah, I thought so, you doltish knaves!" said Skelton;
"but if I had sent wise men about it, it had not been so." Then
Skelton sent for the miller, and asked him if he could tell where
his horse was. "Safe enough, master," said the miller: for he told
Skelton all the matter how he had done. Well, said Skelton,
considering his tale, said, that he was worthy to be hanged, "For
thou dost excel all the thieves that ever I knew or heard of; but
for my promise sake I forgive thee, upon condition thou wilt
become an honest man, and leave all thy craft and false dealing."
And thus John miller escaped unpunished.

How Skelton was in prison at the commandment of the cardinal.
[Tale xiv. ]

On a time Skelton did meet with certain friends of his at Charing
Cross, after that he was in prison at my lord cardinal's
commandment: and his friend said, "I am glad you be abroad among
your friends, for you have been long pent in." Skelton said, "By
the mass, I am glad I am out indeed, for I have been pent in, like
a roach or fish, at Westminster in prison." The cardinal, hearing
of those words, sent for him again. Skelton kneling of his knees
before him, after long communication to Skelton had, Skelton
desired the cardinal to grant him a boon. "Thou shalt have none,"
said the cardinal. Thassistence desired that he might have it
granted, for they thought it should be some merry pastime that he
will show your grace. "Say on, thou hoar head," said the cardinal
to Skelton. "I pray your grace to let me lie down and wallow, for
I can kneel no longer."

How the vinteners wife put water into Skelton's wine. [Tale xv. ]

Skelton did love well a cup of good wine. And on a day he did make
merry in a tavern in London: and the morow after he sent to the
same place again for a quart of the same wine he drunk of before;
the which was clean changed and brewed again. Skelton perceiving
this, he went to the tavern, and did sit down in a chair, and did
sigh very sore, and made great lamentation. The wife of the house,
perceiving this, said to Master Skelton, "How is it with you,
Master Skelton?" He answered and said, "I did never so evil;" and
then he did reach another great sigh, saying, "I am afraid that I
shall never be saved, nor come to heaven." "Why," said the wife,
"should you dispair so much in God's mercy?" "Nay," said he, "it
is past all remedy." Then said the wife, "I do pray you break your
mind unto me." "O," said Skelton, "I would gladly show you the
cause of my dolour, if that I wist that you would keep my
counsel." "Sir," said she, "I have been made of counsel of greater
matters then you can show me." "Nay, nay," said Skelton, "my
matter passeth all other matters, for I think I shall sink to hell
for my great offences; for I sent this day to you for wine to say
mass withall; and we have a strong law that every priest is bound
to put into his chalice, when he doth sing or say mase, some wine
and water; the which doth signify the water and blood that did run
out of Christ's side, when Longeous the blind knight did thrust a
spear to Christ's heart; and this day I did put no water into my
wine, when that I did put wine into my chalice." Then said the
vintiners wife, "Be merry, Master Skelton, and keep my counsel,
for, by my faith, I did put into the vessel of wine that I did
send you of to day x. gallons of water; and therefore take no
thought, Master Skelton, for I warraount you." Then said Skelton,
"Dame, I do beshrew thee for thy labour, for I thought so much
before; for through such uses and brewing of wine may men be
deceived, and be hurt by drinking of such evil wine; for all wines
must be strong, and fair, and well coloured; it must have a
redolent savour; it must be cold, and sprinkling in the pece or in
the glass.

Thus endeth the Merry Tales of Master Skelton, very pleasant for
the recreation of mind.



NOTICES OF SKELTON FROM VARIOUS SOURCES.

From the imperfect copy of A C. Merry Tales, small fol., printed
by John Rastell. (See Singer's reprint, p. 55.

Of Master Skelton that brought the bishop of Norwich ii pheasants.
xl.

IT fortuned there was a great variance between the bishop of
Norwich and one Master Skelton a poet laureate; in so much that
the bishop commanded him that he should not come in his gates.
This Master Skelton did absent himself for a long season. But at
the last he thought to do his duty to him, and studied ways how he
might obtain the bishop's favour, and determined himself that he
would come to him with some present, and humble himself to the
bishop; and got a couple of pheasants, and came to the bishop's
place, and required the porter he might come in to speak with my
lord. This porter, knowing his lord's pleasure, would not suffer
him to come in at the gates; wherfore this Master Skelton went on
the backside to seek some other way to come in to the place. But
the place was moated that he could see no way to come over, except
in one place where there lay a long tree over the moat in manner
of a bridge, that was fallen down with wind; wherefore this Master
Skelton went along upon the tree to come over, and when he was
almost over, his foot slipped for lack of sure footing, and fell
into the moat up to middle; but at the last he recovered himself,
and, as well as he coud, dried himself again, and suddenly came to
the bishop, being in his hall, then lately risen from dinner:
which, when he saw Skelton coming suddenly, said to him, "Why,
thou caitiff, I warned thee thou shouldest never come in at my
gates, and charged my porter to keep thee out." "Forsooth, my
lord," quod Skelton, "though ye gave such charge, and though your
gates be never so surely kept, yet it is no more possible to keep
me out of your doors than to keep out crows or pies; for I came
not in at your gates, but I came over the moat, that I have been
almost drowned for my labour." And shewed his clothes how evil he
was arayed, which caused many that stood thereby to laugh apace.
Than quod Skelton, "If it like your lordship, I have brought you a
dish to your supper, a couple of pheasants." "Nay," quod the
bishop, "I defy thee and thy pheasants also, and, wretch as thou
art, pike thee out of my house, for I will none of thy gift how
[something lost here] Skelton then, considering that the bishop
called him fool so oft, said to one of his familiars thereby, that
though it were evil to be christened a fool, yet it was much worse
to be confirmed a fool of such a bishop; for the name of
confirmation must needs abide. Therefore he imagined how he might
avoid that confirmation, and mused a while, and at the last, said
to the bishop thus, "If your lordship knew the names of these
pheasants, ye would [be] content to take them." Why, caitiff, quod
the bishop hastily and angry, [what] be their names? Ywis, my
lord, quod Skelton, this pheasant is called Alpha, which is, in
primis the first, and this is called Omega, that is, novissimus
the last; and for the more plain understanding of my mind, if it
please your lordship to take them, I promise you, this Alpha is
the first that ever I gave you, and this Omega is the last that
ever I will give you while I live." At which answer all that were
by made great laughter, and they all desired the bishop to be good
lord unto him for his merry conceits: at which earnest entreaty,
as it went, the bishop was content to take him unto his favour
again.

By this tale ye may see that merry conceits doth a man more good
than to fret himself with anger and melancholy."

From Tales, and quick answers, very merry, and pleasant to read.
4to. n.d., printed by Thomas Berthelet. (See Singer's reprint, p.
9.)

Of the beggar's answer to M. Skelton the poet. xiii.

A poor beggar, that was foul, black, and loathly to behold, came
upon a time unto Master Skelton the poet, and asked him his alms.
To whom Master Skelton said, "I pray thee get thee away from me,
for thou lookest as though thou camest out of hell." The poor man,
perceiving he would give him nothing, answered, "For sooth, Sir,
ye say truth; I came out of hell. Why didst thou not tarry still
there?" quod Master Skelton. "Marry, Sir," quod the beggar, "there
is no room for such poor beggars as I am; all is kept for such
gentlemen as ye be."

Prefixed to Pithy pleasaunt and profitable works of master
Skelton, Poet Laureate. Now collected and newly published. Anno
1568. 12mo.

IF sloth and tract of time
(That wears each thing away)
Should rust and canker worthy arts,
Good works would soon decay.
If such as present are
Forgoeth the people past,
Our selves should soon in silence sleep,
And lose renown at last.
No soil nor land so rude
But some odd men can show:
Then should the learned pass unknown,
Whose pen and skill did flow?
God shield our sloth were such,
Or world so simple now,
That knowledge 'scaped without reward,
Who searcheth virtue through,
And paints forth vice aright,
And blames abuse of men,
And shows what lief deserves rebuke,
And who the praise of pen.
You see how foreign realms
Advance their poets all;
And ours are drowned in the dust,
Or hung against the wall.
In France did Marrot reign;
And neighbour there unto
Was Petrarch, marching full with Dante,
Who erst did wonders do;
Among the noble Greeks
Was Homer full of skill;
And where that Ovid nourished was
The soil did flourish still
With letters high of style;
But Virgil won the phrase,
And pased them all for deep engine,
And made them all to gaze
Upon the book he made:
Thus each of them, you see,
Won praise and fame, and honor had,
Each one in their degree.
I pray you, then, my friends,
Disdain not for to view
The works and sugared verses fine
Of our rare poets new;
Whose barbarous language rude
Perhaps ye may mislike;
But blame them not that rudely play
If they the ball do strike,
Nor scorn not mother tongue,
O babes of English breed!
I have of other language seen,
And you at full may read
Fine verses trimly wrought,
And couched in comely sort;
But never I nor you, I trow,
In sentence plain and short
Did yet behold with eye,
In any foreign tongue,
A higher verse, a statlier style,
That may be read or sung,
Than is this day indeed
Our English verse and rhyme,
The grace wherof doth touch the gods,
And reach the clouds sometime.
Through earth and waters deep
The pen by skill doth pass,
And featly nips the world's abuse,
And shows us in a glass
The virtue and the vice
Of every wight alive:
The honeycomb that he doth make
Is not so sweet in hive
As are the golden leaves
That drops from poet's head,
Which doth surmount our common talk
As far as dross [sic] doth lead:
The flour is sifted clean,
The bran is cast aside,
And so good corn is known from chaff
And each fine grain is spied.
Piers Plowman was full plain,
And Chaucer's spirit was great;
Earl Surrey had a goodly vein;
Lord Vaux the mark did beat,
And Phaer did hit the prick
In things he did translate,
And Edwards had a special gift;
And divers men of late
Hath helped our English tongue,
That first was base and brute:-
Oh, shall I leave out Skelton's name,
The blossom of my fruit,
The tree wheron indeed
My branches all might grow?
Nay, Skelton wore the laurel wreath,
And passed in schools, ye know;
A poet for his art,
Whose judgment sure was high,
And had great practice of the pen,
His works they will not lie;
His terms to taunts did lean,
His talk was as he wrote,
Full quick of wit, right sharp of words,
And skilfull of the state;
Of reason ripe and good,
And to the hatefull mind,
That did disdain his doings still,
A scorner of his kind;
Most pleasant every way,
As poets ought to be,
And seldom out of prince's grace,
And great with each degree.
Thus have you heard at full
What Skelton was indeed;
A further knowledge shall you have,
If you his books do read.
I have of mere good will
These verses written here,
To honour virtue as I ought,
And make his fame appear,
That when the garland gay
Of laurel leaves but let:
Small is my pain, great is his praise,
That thus such honour get.
Finis quod Churchyarde.

From Johannis Parkhursti Ludicra sine Epigrammata Juvenilia. 1573,
4to. p. 103.

De Skelton vate et sacerdote.
SKELTONUS gravidam reddebat forte puellam,
Insigni forma quae peperit puerum.
Illico multorum fama haec pervenit ad aures,
Esse patrem nato sacrificum puero.
Skeltonum facti non poenitet aut pudet; aedes
Ad sacras festo sed venit ipse die:
Pulpita conscendit facturus verba popello;
Inque haec prorupit dicta vir ille bonus;
Quid vos, O scurrae, capit admiratio tanta?
Non sunt eunuchi, credite, sacrifici:
O stolidi, vitulum num me genuisse putatis
Non genui vitulum, sed lepidum puerum;
Sique meis verbis non creditis, en puer, inquit;
Atque e suggesto protulit, ac abiit."

("Of Skelton the priest and poet.
It happened that Skelton got a girl pregnant
Who gave birth to a boy.
This story came to the ears of many
That a son was born to a priest.
Skelton was not ashamed or penitent,
But went to church the same day to say Mass
He went in the pulpit to preach to the people
This good man confronted them thus:
'Why, you scoundrels, are you making a fuss?
Believe me, priests are not eunuchs
You fools, do not think that I have fathered a calf,
It is not a calf, but a lively boy:
If you don't believe me, here is the boy,' he said,
And he brought him out to show them, and then went away.")

From A Treatise Against Judicial Astrology. Dedicated to the Right
Honorable Sir Thomas Egerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
Written by John Chamber, one of the Prebendaries of her Majesty's
free Chapel of Windsor, and Fellow of Eton College. 1601. 4to.

Not much unlike to merry Skelton, who thrust his wife out at the
door, and received her in again at the window. The story is well
known how the bishop had charged him to thrust his wife out of the
door: but that which was but a merriment in Skelton, &c. p. 99.

So that the leap year, for any thing I see, might well use the
defence of merry Skelton, who being a priest, and having a child
by his wife, every one cried out, "Oh, Skelton hath a child, fie
on him," &c. Their mouths at that time he could not stop: but on a
holy day, in a merry mood, he brought the child to church with
him, and in the pulpit stript it naked, and held it out, saying,
"See this child: is it not a pretty child, as other children be,
even as any of yours? hath it not legs, arms, head, feet, limbs,
proportioned every way as it should be? If Skelton had begot a
monster, as a calf, or such like, what a life should poor Skelton
have had then? So we say for the leap year, if it had changed the
nature of things, as it is charged, how should it have done then
to defend itself?
p. 113.

From The Life of Long Meg of Westminster: containing the mad merry
pranks she played in her life time, not only in performing sundry
quarrels with divers ruffians about London: But also how valiantly
she behaved herself in the wars of Boulogne. 1635. 4to. (Of this
tract there is said to have been a much earlier edition. I quote
from the reprint in Miscellanea Antiqua Anglicana, 1816.)

CHAP. II
Containing how he [the carrier] placed her in Westminster, and
what she did at her placing.

AFTER the carrier had set up his horse, and dispatched his lading,
he remembered his oath, and therefore bethought him how he might
place these three maids: with that he called to mind that the
mistress at the Eagle in Westminster had spoken divers times to
him for a servant; he with his carriage passed over the fields to
her house, where he found her sitting and drinking with a Spanish
knight called Sir James of Castile, doctor Skelton, and Will
Sommers; told her how he had brought up to London three Lancashire
lasses, and seeing she was oft desirous to have a maid, now she
should take her choice which of them she would have. "Marry,"
quoth she, (being a very merry and a pleasant woman,) "carrier,
thou comest in good time; for not only I want a maid, but here be
three gentlemen that shall give me their opinions, which of them I
shall have." With that the maids were bidden come in, and she
intreated them to give their verdict. Straight as soon as they saw
Long Meg, they began to smile; and doctor Skelton in his mad merry
vein, blessing himself, began thus:

Domine, Domine, unde hoc? ("Lord, lord, where is she from?")
What is she in the gray cassock?
Me thinks she is of a large length,
Of a tall pitch, and a good strength,
With strong arms and stiff bones;
This is a wench for the nones:
Her looks are bonny and blithe,
She seemes neither lither nor lithe,
But young of age,
And of a merry visage,
Neither beastly nor bowsy,
Sleepy nor drowsy,
But fair fac'd and of a good size;
Therefore, hostess, if you be wise,
Once be ruled by me,
Take this wench to thee;
For this is plain,
She'll do more work than these twain:
I tell thee, hostess, I do not mock;
Take her in the gray cassock.

"What is your opinion?" quoth the hostess to Sir James of
Castile." "Question with her," quoth he, "what she can do, and
then I'll give you mine opinion: and yet first, hostess, ask Will
Sommers' opinion." Will smiled, and swore that his hostess should
not have her, but King Harry should buy her. "Why so, Will?" quoth
doctor Skelton: "Because," quoth Will Sommers, "that she shall be
kept for breed; for if the King would marry her to long Sanders of
the court, they would bring forth none but soldiers." Well, the
hostess demanded what her name was. "Margaret, forsooth," quoth
she. "And what work can you do?" "Faith, little, mistress," quoth
she, "but handy labour, as to wash and wring, to make clean a
house, to brew, bake, or any such drudgery: for my needle, to that
I have been little used to." "Thou art," quoth the hostess, "a
good lusty wench, and therefore I like thee the better: I have
here a great charge, for I keep a victualling house, and divers
times there come in swaggering fellows, that, when they have eat
and drank, will not pay what they call for: yet if thou take the
charge of my drink, I must be answered out of your wages."
"Content, mistress," quoth she; "for while I serve you, if any
stale cutter comes in, and thinks to pay the shot with swearing,
hey, gogs wounds, let me alone! I'll not only (if his clothes be
worth it) make him pay ere he pass, but lend him as many bats as
his crag will carry, and then throw him out of doors." At this
they all smiled. "Nay, mistress," quoth the carrier, "'tis true,
for my poor pilch here is able with a pair of blue shoulders to
swear as much;" and with that he told them how she had used him at
her coming to London. "I cannot think," quoth Sir James of 
Castile, "that she is so strong." "Try her," quoth Skelton, "for I
have heard that Spaniards are of wonderful strength." Sir James in
a bravery would needs make experience, and therefore asked the
maid if she durst change a box on the ear with him." "Aye, sir,"
quoth she, "that I dare, if my mistress will give me leave." "Yes,
Meg," quoth she; "do thy best." And with that it was a question
who should stand first: "Marry, that I will, sir," quoth she; and
so stood to abide Sir James his blow; who, forcing himself with
all his might, gave her such a box that she could scarcely stand,
yet she stirred no more than a post. Then Sir James he stood, and
the hostess willed her not spare her strength. "No," quoth
Skelton; "and if she fell him down, I'll give her a pair of new
hose and shoon." "Mistress," quoth Meg (and with that she struck
up her sleeve,) "here is a foul fist, and it hath passed much
drudgery, but, trust me, I think it will give a good blow: and
with that she raught at him so strongly, that down fell Sir James
at her feet. "By my faith," quoth Will Sommers, "she strikes a
blow like an axe, for she hath struck down an ass." At this they
all laughed. Sir James was ashamed, and Meg was entertained into
service.

CHAP. IV. 
Containing the merry skirmish that was between her and Sir James
of Castile, a Spanish knight, and what was the end of their
combat.

There was a great suitor to Meg's mistress, called Sir James of
Castile, to win her love: but her affection was set on doctor
Skelton; so that Sir James could get no grant of any favour.
Whereupon he swore, if he knew who were her paramour, he would run
him through with his rapier. The mistress (who had a great delight
to be pleasant) made a match between her and Long Meg, that she
should go drest in gentleman's apparel, and with her sword and
buckler go and meet Sir James in Saint George's field[s]; if she
beat him, she should for her labour have a new petticoat. "Let me
alone," quoth Meg; "the devil take me if I lose a petticoat." And
with that her mistress delivered her a suit of white satin, that
was one of the guards that lay at her house. Meg put it on, and
took her whinyard by her side, and away she went into Saint
George's fields to meet Sir James. Presently after came Sir James,
and found his mistress very melancholy, as women have faces that
are fit for all fancies. "What ail you, sweetheart?" quoth he;
"tell me; hath any man wronged you? if he hath, be he the proudest 
champion in London, I'll have him by the ears, and teach him to
know, Sir James of Castile can chastise whom he list." "Now,"
quoth she, "shall I know if you love me: a squaring long knave, in
a white satin doublet, hath this day monstrously misused me in
words, and I have nobody to revenge it; and in a bravery went out
of doors, and bade the proudest champion I had come into Saint
George's fields and quit my wrong, if they durst: now Sir James,
if ever you loved me, learn the knave to know how he hath wronged
me, and I will grant whatsoever you request at my hands." "Marry,
that I will," quoth he; "and for that you may see how I will use
the knave, go with me, you and master doctor Skelton, and be eye-
witnesses of my manhood. To this they agreed; and all three went
into Saint George's fields, where Long Meg was walking by the
windmills. "Yonder," quoth she, "walks the villain that abused
me." "Follow me, hostess," quoth Sir James; I'll go to him." As
soon as he drew nigh, Meg began to settle herself, and so did Sir
James: but Meg passed on as though she would have gone by. "Nay,
sirrah, stay," quoth Sir James; "you and I part not so, we must
have a bout ere we pass; for I am this gentlewoman's champion, and
flatly for her sake will have you by the ears." Meg replied not a
word; but only out with her sword: and to it they went. At the
first bout Meg hit him on the hand, and hurt him a little, but
endangered him divers times, and made him give ground, following
so hotly, that she strucke Sir James' weapon out of his hand; then
when the saw him disarm'd, she stept within him, and, drawing her
poniard, swore all the world should not save him. "Oh, save me,
sir!" quoth he; "I am a knight, and 'tis but for a woman's matter;
spill not my blood." "Wert thou twenty knights," quoth Meg, "and
were the King himself here, he should not save thy life, unless
thou grant me one thing." "Whatsoever it be," quoth Sir James.
"Marry," quoth she, "that is, that this night thou wait on my
trencher at supper at this woman's house; and when supper is done,
then confess me to be thy better at weapon in any ground in
England." "I will do it, sir," quoth he, "as I am a true knight."
With this they departed, and Sir James went home with his hostess
sorrowful and ashamed, swearing that his adversary was the
stoutest man in England. Well, supper was provided, and Sir Thomas
More and divers other gentlemen bidden thither by Skelton's means,
to make up the jest; which when Sir James saw invited, he put a
good face on the matter, and thought to make a slight matter of
it, and therefore beforehand told Sir Thomas More what had
befallen him, how entering in a quarrel of his hostess, he fought
with a desperate gentleman of the court, who had foiled him, and
given him in charge to wait on his trencher that night. Sir Thomas
More answered Sir James, that it was no dishonour to be foiled by
a gentleman [of England?], sith Caesar himself was beaten back by
their valour. As thus they were discanting of the valour of
Englishmen, in came Meg marching in her man's attire: even as she
entered in at the door, "This, Sir Thomas More," quoth Sir James,
is that English gentleman whose prowess I so highly commend, and
to whom in all valour I account myself so inferior." "And, sir,"
quoth she, "pulling off her hat, and her hair falling about her
ears, he that so hurt him today is none other but Long Meg of
Westminster; and so you are all welcome." At this all the company
fell in a great laughing, and Sir James was amazed that a woman
should so wap him in a whinyard: well, he as the rest was fain to
laugh at the matter, and all that supper time to wait on her
trencher, who had leave of her mistress that she might be master
of the feast; where with a good laughter they made good cheer, Sir
James playing the proper page, and Meg sitting in her majesty.
Thus was Sir James disgraced for his love, and Meg after counted
for a proper woman."

Scogan and Skelton, 1600, a play by Richard Hathway and William
Hankins, is mentioned in Henslowe's MSS.: see Malone's Shakespeare
(by Boswell,) iii. 324.

Notices of Skelton may also be found in:

- A Dialogue both pleasant and pitiful, wherein is a godly
regiment against the Fever Pestilence, with a consolation and
comfort against death. Newly corrected by William Bullein, the
author thereof. 1573, 8vo. Of this piece I have seen only the
above ed.; but it appeared originally in 1564. It contains notices
of several poets, introduced by way of interlude or diversion in
the midst of a serious dialogue; and (at p. 17) Skelton is
described as sitting "in the corner of a Pillar, with a frosty
bitten face, frowning," and "writing many a sharp Disticons
"against Wolsey-

"How the Cardinal came of nought,
And his Prelacy sold and bought," &c.
(15 verses chiefly made up from Skelton's works).

- The Reward of Wickedness, discoursing the sundry monstrous
abuses of wicked and ungodly Worldlings, &c. Newly compiled by
Richard Robinson, servant in household to the right honorable
Earle of Shrewsbury, &c. 4to, no d. (The Address to the Reader
dated 1574,) at sig. Q 2.

- A Discourse of English Poetry, &c., By William Webbe, Graduate,
1586, 4to, at sig. c iii.

- The Art of English Poesy, &c. (attributed to one Puttenham: but
see D'Israeli's Amen. of Lit. ii. 278, sqq.), 1589, 4to, at pp.
48, 50, 69.

- Four Letters, and certain Sonnets: Especially touching Robert
Greene, &c. (by Gabriell Harvey,) 1592, 4to, at p. 7.

- Pierces Supererogation or a New Praise of the Old Ass, &c. [by]
Gabriell Harvey, 1593, 4to, at p. 75.

- Palladis Tamia. Wit's Treasury Being the Second part of Wit's
Commonwealth. By Francis Meres, &c., 1598, 12mo, at p. 278279.

- Virgidemiarum. The three last books of biting Satires. (by
Joseph Hall,) 1598, 12mo, at p. 83.

- The Downfall of Robert Earl of Huntington, Afterward called
Robin Hood of merry Sherwood. (by Anthony Munday,) 1601, 4to. In
this play, which is supposed to be a rehearsal previous to its
performance before Henry the Eighth, Skelton acts the part of
Friar Tuck.

- In The Death of Robert, Earl of Huntington, &c. (by Anthony
Munday and Henry Chettle,) 1601, 4to, which forms a Second Part to
the drama just described, Skelton, though his name is not
mentioned throughout it, is still supposed to act the Friar.

- Miscellanea, written out by "Johnes Mauritius" between 1604 and
1605-MS. Reg. 12. B. v. - contains (at fol. 14,) and attributes to
Skelton, a well-known indelicate jeu d'esprit.

- Pimlico, or Run Red-Cap. 'Tis a mad world at Hogsdon, 1609, 4to.
Besides a notice of Skelton, this poem contains two long
quotations from his Elynour Rumming.

- Cornucopiae. Pasquil's Night-cap: Or Antidote for the Head-ache
(by Samuel Rowlands,) 1612, 4to, at sig. O 2 and sig. Q 3. The
second notice of Skelton in this poem is as follows;

"And such a wondrous troupe the Hornpipe treads,
One cannot pass another for their heads,
That shortly we shall have (as Skelton jests)
A greater sort of horned men than beasts:"

but I recollect nothing in his works to which the allusion can be
applied.

- An Half-pennyworth of wit, in a Pennyworth of Paper. Or, The
Hermit's Tale. The third Impression. 1613, 4to. At p. 16 of this
poem is a tale said to be "in Skelton's rime "-to which, however,
it bears no resemblance.

- The Shepherd's Pipe (by Browne and Withers,) 1614, 12mo, in
Eglogue 1., at sig. C 7

- Hypercritica; or A Rule of Judgment for writing, or reading our
Histories, &c. By Edmund Bolton, Author of Nero Caesar (Published
by Dr. Anthony Hall together with Nicolai Triveti Annalium
Continuatio, &c.), 1722, 8vo, at p. 235. At what period Bolton
wrote this treatise is uncertain: he probably completed it about
1618; see Haslewood's Preface to Anc. Crit. Essays, &c. ii. xvi.

- Poems: By Michael Drayton Esquire, n.d. folio, at p. 283.

- The Golden Fleece Divided into three Parts, &c., by Orpheus
Junior [Sir William Vaughan], 1626, 4to, at pp. 83, 88, 93, of the
Third Part. In this piece "Scogin and Skelton" figure as "the
chief Advocates for the Doggerel Rhymers by the procurement of
Zoilus, Momus, and others of the Popish Sect."

- The Fortunate Isles, and their Union. Celebrated in a Masque
designed for the Court, on the Twelfth-night, 1626, by Ben Jonson.
In this masque are introduced "Skogan and Skelton, in like habits
as they lived:" see Jonson's Works, viii. ed. Gifford: see also
his Tale of a Tub (licensed 1633), Works, vi. 231.

- Wit and Fancy In a Maze. Or the Incomparable Champion of Love
and Beauty. A Mock-Romance, &c. Written originally in the British
Tongue, and made English by a person of much Honour. Si foret in
terris rideret Democritus. 1656, 12mo. [Note Such is the title-
page of the copy now before me: but some copies (see Restituta,
iv. 196) are entitled Don Zara del Fogg, &c. 1656; and others
Romancio-Mastix, or a Romance of Romances, &c. By Samuel Holland.
Gent. 1660.] In this romance (p. 101) we are told that "[In
Elysium] the British Bards (forsooth) were also engaged in quarrel
for Superiority; and who think you threw the Apple of Discord
amongst them, but Ben Jonson, who had openly vaunted himself the
first and best of English Poets . . . Skelton, Gower, and the Monk
of Bury were at Daggers-drawing for Chaucer:" and a marginal note
on "Skelton" informs us that he was "Henry 4. his Poet Laureate,
who wrote disguises for the young Princes"!

- Of Skelton's drama, The Necromancer, the following account is
given by Warton:-

"I cannot quit Skelton, of whom I yet fear too much has been
already said, without restoring to the public notice a play, or
MORALITY, written by him, not recited in any catalogue of his
works, or annals of English typography; and, I believe, at present
totally unknown to the antiquarians in this sort of literature. It
is, The NECROMANCER, a moral INTERLUDE and a pithy written by
Master SKELTON laureate and played before the King and other
estates at Woodstock on Palm Sunday. It was printed by Wynkin de
Worde in a thin quarto, in the year 1504. *[see Note below] It
must have been presented before King Henry the seventh, at the
royal manor or palace, at Woodstock in Oxfordshire, now destroyed.
The characters are a Necromancer or conjurer, the devil, a notary
public, Simony, and Philargyria or Avarice. It is partly a satire
on some abuses in the church; yet not without a due regard to
decency, and an apparent respect for the dignity of the audience.
The story, or plot, is the trial of SIMONY and AVARICE: the devil
is the judge, and the notary public acts as an assessor or scribe.
The prisoners, as we may suppose, are found guilty, and ordered
into hell immediately. There is no sort of propriety in calling
this play the Necromancer: for the only business and use of this
character, is to open the subject in a long prologue, to evoke the
devil, and summon the court. The devil kicks the necromancer, for
waking him so soon in the morning: a proof that this drama was
performed in the morning, perhaps in the chapel of the palace. A
variety of measures, with shreds of Latin and French, is used: but
the devil speaks in the octave stanza. One of the stage-directions
is, Enter Beelzebub with a Beard. To make him both frightful and
ridiculous, the devil was most commonly introduced on the stage
wearing a visard with an immense beard. Philargyria quotes Seneca
and saint Austin: and Simony offers the devil a bribe. The devil
rejects her offer with much indignation: and swears by the foul
Eumenides, and the hoary beard of Charon, that she shall be well
fried and roasted in the unfathomable sulphur of Cocytus, together
with Mahomet, Pontius Pilate, the traitor Judas, and King Herod.
The last scene is closed with a view of hell, and a dance between
the devil and the necromancer. The dance ended, the devil trips up
the necromancer's heels, and disappears in fire and smoke." Hist.
of E. P. ii. 360. ed. 4to.

*Note: "My lamented friend Mr. William Collins, whose Odes will be
remembered while any taste for true poetry remains, showed me this
piece at Chichester, not many months before his death: and he 
pointed it out as a very rare and valuable curiosity. He intended
to write the HISTORY OF THE RESTORATION OF LEARNING UNDER LEO THE
TENTH, and with a view to that design, had collected many scarce
books. Some few of these fell into my hands at his death. The
rest, among which, I suppose, was this INTERLUDE, were dispersed."



ON THE DEATH OF THE NOBLE PRINCE, KING EDWARD THE FOURTH
PER SKELTONIDEM LAUREATUM
[From the ed. by Kynge and Marche of Certain books compiled by
Master Skelton, n.d. - collated with the same work, ed. Day, n.d.
and ed. Lant, n.d.; with Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568;
occasionally with the Mirror for Magistrates, 1587 (in the earlier
eds. of which the poem was incorporated,) and with a contemporary
MS. in the possession of Miss Richardson Currer, which last has
furnished a stanza hitherto unprinted.]

<1>

Miseremini mei,<2> ye that be my friends!
This world hath conformed me down to fall.
How may I endure, when that every thing ends?
What creature is born to be eternal?
Now there is no more but pray for me all:
Thus say I Edward, that late was your king,
And twenty-two years ruled this imperial,
Some unto pleasure, and some to no liking:
Mercy I ask of my misdoing;
What availeth it, friends, to be my foe,                       10
Sith I cannot resist, nor amend your complaining?
Quia, ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio!<3>

I sleep now in mould, as it is natural
That earth unto earth hath his reverture.
What ordained God to be terrestrial
Without recourse to the earth of nature?
Who to live ever may himself assure?
What is it to trust on mutability,
Sith that in this world nothing may endure?
For now am I gone, that late was in prosperity:                20
To presume thereupon it is but a vanity,
Not certain, but as a cherry-fair<4>, full of woe:
Reigned not I of late in great felicity?
Et, ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio!

Where was in my life such one as I,
While Lady Fortune with me had continuance?
Granted not she me to have victory,
In England to reign, and to contribute France? <5>
She took me by the hand and led me a dance,
And with her sugared lips on me she smiled;                    30
But, what for her dissembled countenance,
I could not beware till I was beguiled:
Now from this world she hath me exiled,
When I was lothest hence for to go,
And I am in age but, as who saith,<6> a child,
Et, ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio!

I see well, they live that double my years:
Thus dealed this world with me as it list,
And hath me made, to you that be my peers,
Example to think on, had I wist.<7>                            40
I stored my coffers and also my chest
With tasks taking of the commonalty;
I took their treasure, but of their prayers missed;
Whom I beseech with pure humility
For to forgive and have on me pity;
I was your king, and kept you from your foe:
I would now amend, but that will not be,
Quia, ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio!

I had enough, I held me not content,
Without remembrance that I should die;                         50
And more ever to encroach ready was I bent,
I knew not how long I should it occupy:<8>
I made the Tower strong,<9> I wist not why;
I knew not to whom I purchased Tattershall;<10>
I amended Dover<11> on the mountain high,
And London I provoked<12> to fortify the wall;
I made Nottingham<13> a place full royal,
Windsor,<14> Eltham,<15> and many other mo:
Yet, at the last, I went from them all,
Et, ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio!                              60

Where is now my conquest and victory?
Where is my riches and my royal array?
Where be my coursers and my horses high?
Where is my mirth, my solace, and my play?
As vanity, to nought all is wandered away.
O Lady Bess,<16> long for me may ye call!
For I am departed till doomsday;
But love ye that Lord that is sovereign of all.
Where be my castles and buildings royal?
But Windsor alone, now I have no mo,<17>                       70
And of Eton the prayers perpetual,
Et, ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio!

Why should a man be proud or presume high?
Saint Bernard thereof nobly doth treat,<18>
Saith a man is but a sack of stercory,
And shall return unto worm's meat.
Why, what came of Alexander the Great?
Or else of strong Sampson, who can tell?
Were not worms ordained their flesh to fret?
And of Solomon, that was of wit the well?                      80
Absolon proffered his hair for to sell,
Yet for all his beauty worms eat him also;
And I but late in honour did excel,
Et, ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio!

I have played my pageant,<19> now am I passed;
Ye wot well all I was of no great eld:
Thus all thing concluded shall be at the last,
When Death approacheth, then lost is the field:
Then sithen this world me no longer upheld,
Nor nought would conserve me here in my place,                 90
In manus tuas, Domine,<20> my spirit up I yield,
Humbly beseeching thee, God, of thy grace!
O ye courteous commons, your hearts unbrace
Benignly now to pray for me also:
For right well you know your king I was,
Et, ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio!



NOTES TO THE DEATH OF KING EDWARD IV
1. Edward the Fourth died April 9th, 1483, in the 41st year of his
age and the 23d of his reign: see Sir H. Nicolas's Chron. of Hist.
pp. 325, 349, sec. ed. These lines were probably composed soon
after the king's death-per Skeltonidem laureatum having been
subsequently added to the title.

2. Miseremini mei] "Have pity on me."

3. Quia, ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio!] "Behold, now I sleep in
the dust!"

4. cherry-fair] Cherry-fairs are still held in some parts of
England on Sunday evenings, in the cherry orchards. They are the
resort of the gay and thoughtless, and as such afforded frequent
metaphors to our early writers for the vanity of worldly things.
See Brand's Antiquities, by Sir H. Ellis, vol. ii. p. 457.-
Halliwell's Dict. in v.

"For all is but a cherry fair,
This world's good, so as they tell."
-Gower's Conf Am., Prol., fol. 3. ed. 1554.
"And that endureth but a throw,
Right as it were a cherry feast."
-Id. Ib. B. vi. fol. cxxxiii ed 1554.

"This world is but a cherry fair, when ye be highest ye mo
aslake."
-Lydgate's verses entitled Make Amendes,- MS. Cott. Calig. A ii.
fol. 67.

"Revolving all this life a cherry fair,
To look how soon she dead the fairest wight."
-Poems by C. Duke of Orleans,-MS. Harl.
682. fol. 42.

"This world it turns even as a wheel,
All day by day it will impair,
And so, soon, this world's weal,
It fareth but as a cherry fair."
How the wise man taught his son,-Pieces of
An. Pop. Poetry, p. 90. ed. Ritson.

5. to contribute France] i.e. to take tribute of France. In 1475,
Edward withdrew from France with his army on condition that Louis
should pay him immediately 75 thousand crowns, settle on him an
annuity for life of 50 thousand more, &c. See Lingard's Hist. of
Engl. v. 303. ed. 8vo.

6. as who saith] - A not unfrequent expression in our early
poetry, equivalent to-as one may say, as the saying is.

7. Had I wist] i.e. Had I known,-the exclamation of one who
repents of a thing done unadvisedly. It is very common in our 
early poetry. In The Paradise of dainty devises, 1576, the second
copy of verses is entitled Beware of had I wist.

8. occupy] i.e. possess,-or, rather, use: "Surgeons occupy
ointments, &c., Vulnarii medici utuntur," &c. Hormanni Vulgaria,
sig. I. vi. ed. 1530.

9. I made the Tower strong] "Edward IV . . . fortified the Tower,
and made it strong." Stow's Survey, B. i. 79. ed. 1720.

10. I knew not to whom I purchased Tattershall] I have not found
elsewhere any mention of Edward the Fourth having possessed
Tattershall Castle in Lincolnshire. "It does not appear into whose
hands the Tattershall estate fell after the death of the Lord
Treasurer Cromwell [in 1455], until the year 1487, when Henry VII.
granted the manor to his mother Margaret Countess of Richmond,"
&c. Hist. of the County of Lincoln, ii. 73.

11. I amended Dover] "K. Edw. IV. , by the advice of Lord Cobham,
expended 10,000l. in repairing and fortifying the several works,
and beautifying the apartments in it [Dover Castle]." Hasted's
Hist. of Kent, iv. 63.

12. And London I provoked to fortify the wall] "In the Seventeenth
of Edward iv. , Ralph Josceline, Mayor, caused part of the Wall
about the City to be repaired, to wit, between Aldgate and
Aldersgate," &c. Stow's Survey, B. I. 10. ed. 1720.

13. I made Nottingham a place full royal] Leland, describing
Nottingham Castle, says; "But the most beautifullest Part and
gallant Building for lodging is on the North side, where Edward
the 4. began a right sumptuous piece of Stone Work, of the which
he clearly finished one excellent goodly Tower of 3. Heights in
Building, and brought up the other Part likewise from the
Foundation with Stone and marvellous fair compassed windows to
laying of the first soil for Chambers and there left." Itin. i.
107. ed. 1770.

14. Windsor] "The present magnificent fabric [St. George's Chapel
at Windsor], which exhibits one of the most beautiful specimens in
this or any other kingdom, of that richly ornamented species of
architecture, which prevailed towards the close of the fifteenth
and the commencement of the 16th century, was begun by King Edward
IV. , who having found it necessary to take down the old chapel on
account of its decayed state, resolved to build another on the
same site, upon a larger scale, and committed the superintendence
of the building to Richard Beauchamp, bishop of Salisbury. The
work was not completed till the reign of King Henry VIII.," &c.
Lysons's Berkshire, p 424: see too p. 468 of the same volume.-An
account of the manors, &c., granted by Edward to Windsor College,
will be found in Pote's Hist. of Wind. Castle, p. 107.

15. Eltham] "K. Edw. iv. repaired this house [Eltham Palace] with
much cost, and enclosed Horne Park," &c. Hasted's Hist. of Kent,
i. 51.

16. Lady Bess] Edward married, May 1st, 1464, the Lady Elizabeth
Grey, widow of Sir John Grey, and daughter of Wydevile Lord Rivers
by Jacquetta (or Jacqueline) Duchess of Bedford.

17. Where be my castles and buildings royal?
But Windsor alone, now I have no mo] He [Edward IV. ] lies buried
at Windsor, in the new Chapel (whose Foundation himself had laid,
being all the Works of Piety by him left) under a Monument of
Steel, polished and gilt, [iron gilt-see Lysons's Berkshire, p.
210.], representing a Pair of Gates, betwixt Two Towers, all of
curious transparent Workmanship after the Gothic Manner, which is
placed in the North-Arch, faced through with Touch-Stone, near to.
the High-Altar." Sandford's Geneal. Hist. p. 413. ed. 1707.

18. Saint Bernard thereof nobly doth treat] In cap. iii. of
Meditationes piissimae de cognitio humanae conditionis, a piece
attributed to Saint Bernard, we find, "Nihil aliud est homo, quam
sperma foetidum, saccus stercorum, cibus vermium . . . Cur ergo
superbis homo . . . Quid superbis pulvis et cinis," &c. ("Man is
nothing else than a rotten seed, a bag of excrement, food for
worms . . . Why therefore the pride of man? why the pride of dust
and ashes?") Bernardi Opp. ii. 335-36. ed. 1719. In a Rythmus de
contemptu mundi, attributed to the same saint, are these lines ;

"Dic ubi Salomon, olim tam nobilis?
Vel ubi Samson est, dux invincibilis?
Vel pulcher Absalon, vultu mirabilis?
* * * *
O esca vermium O massa pulveris !
O roris vanitas, cur sic extolleris?"
Opp. ii. 913-14. ed. 1719,

("Say where is Solomon, once so noble?
Or where is Samson, the invincible warrior?
Or beautiful Absalom, with marvellous features?
* * * *
O food for worms, O pile of dust
O dew of vanity, why will you praise it so?")

(This Rythmus is printed by Mr. Wright among The Latin Poems
attributed to Walter Lapes, p. 147.) So also Lydgate in a poem on
the mutability of human affairs;

"And where is Salomon most sovereign of cunning;
Richest of building, of treasure incomparable?
Face of Absolon most fair, most amiable?
* * * *
And where is Alexander that conquered all?"
MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 4, 5.

19. I have played my pageant,]-my part on the stage of life.
Compare

"Their pageants are past,
And ours wasteth fast,
Nothing doth aye last
But the grace of God."
Feylde's Controv. between a lover and a jay, sig. B iii. n. d.
4to.

The word pageant was originally applied to the temporary erections
(sometimes placed upon wheels) on which miracle-plays were
exhibited, afterwards to the exhibition itself. See Sharp's Diss.
on Coventry Pag. and Myst. p. 2; Collier's Hist. of Engl. Dram.
Poet. ii. 151.

20. In manus tuas, Domine] "In your hands, Lord."



ON THE DEATH OF THE EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND

[From Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568, collated with a copy
of the poem in a MS. vol. now in the British Museum (MS.Reg 18 D
ii fol. 165,) which formerly belonged to the fifth Earl of
Northumberland, son of the nobleman whose fate is here lamented.
This elegy was printed by Percy in his Reliques of An. Eng. Poetry
(i. 95, ed 1794,) from the MS. just mentioned.]

POETA SKELTON LAUREATUS LIBELLUM SUUM METRICE ALLOQUITUR

Ad dominum properato meum, mea pagina, Percy,
Qui Northumbrorum iura paterna gerit;
Ad nutum celebris tu prona repone leonis
Quaeque suo patri tristia iusta cano.
Ast ubi perlegit, dubiam sub mente volutet
Fortunam, cuncta quae malefida rotat.
Qui leo sit felix, et Nestoris occupet annos;
Ad libitum cuius ipse paratus ero. <1>

SKELTON LAUREATE
UPON THE DOLOROUS DEATH AND MUCH LAMENTABLE CHANCE OF THE MOST
HONOURABLE EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND

 <2>

I WAIL, I weep, I sob, I sigh full sore
The deadly fate, the doleful destiny
Of him that is gone, alas, without restore,
Of the blood royal descending nobly;<3>
Whose lordship doubtless was slain lamentably
Through treason, again him compassed and wrought,
True to his prince in word, in deed, and thought.

Of heavenly poems, O Clio called by name
In the College of Muses goddess historial,
Address thee to me, which am both halt and lame                10
In elect utterance to make memorial!
To thee for succour, to thee for help I call,
Mine homely rudeness and dryness to expel
With the fresh waters of Helicon's well.

Of noble acts anciently enrolled
Of famous princes and lords of estate,
By thy report are wont to be extolled,
Registering truly every former date;
Of thy bounty after the usual rate
Kindle in me such plenty of thy noblesse                       20
These sorrowful ditties that I may show express.

In seasons past, who hath heard or seen
Of former writing by any precedent
That villein haskards in their furious teen,
Fulfilled with malice of froward intent,
Confettered together of common consent
Falsely to slay their most singular good lord?
It may be registered of shameful record.

So noble a man, so valiant lord and knight,
Fulfilled with honour, as all the world doth ken;              30
At his commandment which had both day and night
Knights and squires, at every season when
He called upon them, as menial household men:
Were not these commons uncourteous carls of kind<4>
To slay their own lord? God was not in their mind!

And were not they to blame, I say, also,
That were about him, his own servants of trust,
To suffer him slain of his mortal foe?
Fled away from him, let him lie in the dust;
They bode not till the reckoning were discussed;               40
What should I flatter? what should I glose or paint?
Fie, fie for shame, their hearts were too faint.

In England and France which greatly was redoubted,
Of whom both Flanders and Scotland stood in dread,
To whom great estates<5> obeyed and louted,
A meiny of rude villeins made him for to bleed;
Unkindly they slew him, that holp them oft at need:
He was their bulwark, their pavis, and their wall,
Yet shamefully they slew him; that shame may them befall!

I say, ye commoners, why were ye so stark mad?                 50
What frantic frenzy fell in your brain?
Where was your wit and reason ye should have had?
What wilful folly made you to rise again
Your natural lord? alas, I cannot feign:
Ye armed you with will, and left your wit behind:
Well may ye be called commons most unkind!

He was your chieftain, your shield, your chief defence,
Ready to assist you in every time of need;
Your worship depended of his excellence:
Alas, ye madmen, too far ye did exceed;                        60
Your hap was unhappy, too ill was your speed:
What moved you again him to war or to fight?
What ailed you to slay your lord again all right?

The ground of his quarrel was for his sovereign lord,
The well concerning of all the whole land,
Demanding such duties as needs must accord
To the right of his prince, which should not be withstand;
For whose cause ye slew him with your own hand.
But had his noblemen done well that day
Ye had not been able to have said him nay.                     70

But there was false packing, or else I am beguiled;
How be it, the matter was evident and plain,
For if they had occupied their spear and their shield,
This nobleman doubtless had not been slain.
But men say they were linked with a double chain,
And held with the commons under a cloak,
Which kindled the wild fire that made all this smoke.

The commons renied their taxes to pay,
Of them demanded and asked by the king;
With one voice importune they plainly said nay;                80
They busked them on a bushment themselves in bale to bring,
Again the king's pleasure to wrestle or to wring;
Bluntly as beasts with boast and with cry.
They said they forced not, nor cared not to die.

The nobleness of the north, this valiant lord and knight,
As man that was innocent of treachery or train,
Pressed forth boldly to withstand the might,
And, like martial Hector, he fought them again,
Vigorously upon them with might and with main,
Trusting in noblemen that were with him there;                 90
But all they fled from him for falsehood or fear.

Barons, knights, squires, one and all,
Together with servants of his family,
Turned their backs, and let their master fall,
Of whose life they counted not a fly:
Take up who would, for there they let him lie.
Alas, his gold, his fee, his annual rent
Upon such a sort was ill bestowed and spent!

He was environed about on every side
With his enemies, that were stark mad and wood;               100
Yet while he stood he gave them wounds wide:
Alas for ruth! what though his mind were good,
His courage manly, yet there he shed his blood:
All left alone, alas, he fought in vain!
For cruelly among them there he was slain.

Alas for pity! that Percy thus was spilt,
The famous Earl of Northumberland!
Of knightly prowess the sword, pommel, and hilt,
The mighty lion<1> doubted by sea and land:
O dolorous chance of Fortune's froward hand!                  110
What man, rememb'ring how shamefully he was slain,
From bitter weeping himself can restrain?

O cruel Mars, thou deadly god of war!
O dolorous Tuesday, dedicate to thy name,
When thou shook thy sword so noble a man to mar.
O ground ungracious, unhappy be thy fame,
Which wert endyed with red blood of the same
Most noble earl! O foul misused ground
Whereon he got his final deadly wound!

O Atropos, of the fatal sisters iii,                          120
Goddess most cruel unto the life of man,
All merciless, in thee is no pity!
O homicide, which slayest all that thou can,
So forcibly upon this earl thou ran
That with thy sword, enharped of mortal dread,
Thou cut asunder his perfect vital thread!

My words unpolished be, naked and plain,
Of aureat poems they want illumining;
But by them to knowledge ye may attain
Of this lord's death and of his murdering;                    130
Which whiles he lived had foison of everything,
Of knights, of squires, chief lord of tower and town,
Till fickle Fortune began on him to frown.

Paregal to dukes, with kings he might compare,
Surmounting in honour all earls he did exceed;
To all countries about him report me I dare;
Like to Aeneas benign in word and deed,
Valiant as Hector in every martial need,
Provident, discreet, circumspect, and wise,
Till the chance ran again him of Fortune's double dice.
                                                              140

What needeth me for to extol his fame
With my rude pen encankered all with rust,
Whose noble acts show worshiply his name,
Transcending far mine homely Muse, that must
Yet somewhat write supprised with hearty lust,
Truly reporting his right noble estate,
Immortally which is immaculate?

His noble blood never distained was,
True to his prince for to defend his right,
Doubleness hating false matters to compass,                   150
Traitory and treason he banished out of sight,
With truth to meddle was all his whole delight,
As all his country can testify the same:
To slay such a lord, alas, it was great shame!

If the whole choir of the Muses nine
In me all only were set and comprised,
Enbreathed with the blast of influence divine,
As perfectly as could be thought or devised:
To me also although it were promised
Of laureate Phoebus wholly the eloquence,                     160
All were too little for his magnificence.

O young lion,<6> but tender yet of age,
Grow and increase, remember thine estate;
God thee assist unto thine heritage,
And give thee grace to be more fortunate!
Again rebellions arm thee to make debate;
And, as the lion, which is of beasts king,
Unto thy subjects be courteous and benign.

I pray God send thee prosperous life and long,
Stable thy mind constant to be and fast,                      170
Right to maintain, and to resist all wrong:
All flattering faitours abhor and from thee cast;
Of foul detraction God keep thee from the blast!
Let double dealing in thee have no place,
And be not light of credence in no case.

With heavy cheer, with dolorous heart and mind,
Each man may sorrow in his inward thought
This lord's death, whose peer is hard to find,
Algife England and France were through sought.
All kings, all princes, all dukes, well they ought,           180
Both temporal and spiritual, for to complain
This nobleman, that cruelly was slain:

More specially barons, and those knights bold,
And all other gentlemen with him entertained
In fee, as menial men of his household,
Whom he as lord worshiply maintained;
To sorrowful weeping they ought to be constrained,
As oft as they call to their remembrance
Of their good lord the fate and deadly chance.

O peerless Prince of heaven imperial!                         190
That with one word formed all things of nought;
Heaven, hell, and earth obey unto thy call;
Which to thy resemblance wondrously hast wrought
All mankind, whom thou full dear hast bought,
With thy blood precious our finance thou did pay,
And us redeemed from the fiend's prey;

To thee pray we, as Prince incomparable,
As thou art of mercy and pity the well,
Thou bring unto thy joy interminable
The soul of this lord from all danger of hell,                200
In endless bliss with thee to bide and dwell
In thy palace above the orient,
Where thou art Lord and God omnipotent.

O Queen of Mercy, O Lady full of grace,
Maiden most pure, and God's Mother dear,
To sorrowful hearts chief comfort and solace,
Of all women O flower withouten peer!
Pray to thy Son above the stars clear,
He to vouchsafe, by thy mediation,
To pardon thy servant, and bring to salvation.                210

In joy triumphant the heavenly hierarchy,
With all the whole sort of that glorious place,
His soul may receive into their company,
Thorough bounty of Him that formed all solace:
Well of pity, of mercy, and of grace,
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
In Trinity one God of might's most!

Non sapit, humanis qui certam ponere rebus
Spem cupit: est hominem raraque ficta fides.<7>

TETRASTICHON SKELTON. LAUREATI AD MAGISTRUM RUKSHAW, SACRAE
THEOLOGIAE EGREGIUM PROFESSOREM<8>

Accipe nunc demum, doctor celeberrime Rukshaw,
Carmina, de calamo quae cecidere meo
Et quanquam placidis non sunt modulates camenis,
Sunt tamen ex nostro pectore prompta pio.<9>

Vale feliciter, virorum laudatissime.<10>



NOTES TO THE DEATH OF THE EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND

1. "SKELTON THE POET LAUREATE SPEAKS IN METRE IN THIS LITTLE BOOK

"May my writing go quickly to you, my Lord Percy, who 
Holds the inheritance of Northumberland
At whose nod you can replace the famous lion*
And of whose appropriate sadness for his father I sing,
But when he has read these verses, let him consider in his mind
His own uncertain fortune, surrounded as he is by treachery,
May the lion be lucky, and may he attain Nestor's years
And may I be ready to please him."
(Mervyn James)

* Alluding to his crest and supporters. See v. 109 of the poem.

2. This elegy must have been written soon after the earl's murder:
see v. 162.-"The subject of this poem . . . is the death of Henry
Percy, fourth earl of Northumberland, who fell a victim to the
avarice of Henry VII. In 1489, the parliament had granted the king
a subsidy for carrying on the war in Brittany. This tax was found
so heavy in the North, that the whole country was in a flame. The
E. of Northumberland, then lord lieutenant for Yorkshire, wrote to
inform the king of the discontent, and praying an abatement. But
nothing is so unrelenting as avarice: the King wrote back that not
a penny should be abated. This message being delivered by the earl
with too little caution, the populace rose, and, supposing him to
be the promoter of their calamity, broke into his house, and
murdered him, with several of his attendants, who yet are charged
by Skelton with being backward in their duty on this occasion.
This melancholy event happened at the earl's seat at Cocklodge,
near Thirsk, in Yorkshire, April 28, 1489. See Lord Bacon, &c. If
the reader does not find much poetical merit in this old poem
(which yet is one of Skelton's best [?]), he will see a striking
picture of the state and magnificence kept up by our ancient
nobility during the feudal times. This great earl is described
here as having, among his menial servants, KNIGHTS, SQUIRES, and
even BARONS: see v. 32, v. 183, &c., which, however different from
modern manners, was formerly not unusual with our greater Barons,
whose castles had all the splendour and offices of a royal court,
before the Laws against Retainers abridged and limited the number
of their attendants." PERCY.

3. Of the blood royal descending nobly] "The mother of Henry,
first Earl of Northumberland; was Mary daughter to Henry E. of
Lancaster whose father Edmond was second son of K. Henry iii. The
mother and wife of the second Earl of Northumberland were both
lineal descendants of K. Edward iii. The Percys also were lineally
descended from the Emperor Charlemagne and the ancient Kings of
France, by his ancestor Josceline de Lovain (son of Godfrey Duke
of Brabant), who took the name of Percy on marrying the heiress of
that house in the reign of Hen. ii. Vid. Camdeni Britan.,
Edmondson, &c." PERCY.

4. carls of kind] i.e. churls by nature.

5. great estates] i.e. persons of great estate or rank

6. O young lion] The fifth Earl of Northumberland was only eleven
years old at his father's death.

7. Non sapit, &c] "He does not know in what men he may hope to put
his trust, for it is rare for men to keep faith"

8. Tetrastichon Skelton, &c.] "A four-line poem of the Laureate
Skelton to Master Ruckshaw, most eminent professor of theology.

Take now, most celebrated doctor Ruckshaw, 
These verses which fall from my pen,
And although my strains are not those of the gentle Muse,
They do however come from my pious heart

Farewell, and go happily, O most praiseworthy of men."

Rukshaw - The person here addressed was perhaps "William Rowkshaw,
priest," by whom a letter, dated from the Gilbertine priory of
Watton in the east riding of Yorkshire, is printed among the
Plumpton Correspondence, p. 82. Camd Soc. ed.



AGAINST A COMELY CUSTRON
That curiously chanted and currishly countered and madly in his
musics mockishly made against the ix. Muses of politic poems and
poets matriculate.

[This poem, and the three pieces which follow it, are given from a
tract of four leaves, n.d., and without printer's name (but
evidently from the press of Pynson,) collated with Marshe's ed. of
Skelton's Works, 1568.]

<1>
OF all nations under the heaven,
These frantic fools I hate most of all;
For though they stumble in the sins seven,
In peevishness yet they snapper and fall,
Which men the eighth deadly sin call. <2>
This peevish proud, this prendergest,
When he is well, yet can he not rest.

A sweet sugar-loaf and sour Bayard's bun
Be somedeal like in form and shape,
The one for a duke, the other for dun,                         10
A manchet for morel thereon to snap.
His heart is too high to have any hap;
But for in his gamut carp<3> that he can,
Lo, Jack would be a gentleman!<4>

With, hey, trolly, lolly,<5> lo, whip here, Jack,
Alumbek sodildim sillorim ben!
Curiously he can both counter and knack<6>
Of Martin Swart.<7> and all his merry men.
Lord, how Perkin is proud of his pea-hen!
But ask where he findeth among his monochords                  20
An holy water clerk a ruler of lords.

He cannot find it in rule nor in space:
He solfas too haute, his treble is too high;
He braggeth of his birth, that born was full base;
His music without measure, too sharp is his Mi;
He trimmeth in his tenor to counter pyrdewy;<8>
His descant is busy, it is without a mean;
Too fat is his fancy, his wit is too lean.

He lumb'reth on a lewd lute Rutty Bully joys,
Rumble down, tumble down, hey go, now, now!                    30
He fumbleth in his fingering an ugly good noise,
It seemeth the sobbing of an old sow!
He would be made much of, an he wist how;
Well sped in spindles and turning of tavells;
A bungler, a brawler, a picker of quarrels.

Comely he clappeth a pair of clavichords;
He whistleth so sweetly, he maketh me to sweat;
His descant is dashed full of discords;
A red angry man, but easy to entreat:
An usher of the hall fain would I get                          40
To point this proud page a place and a room,
For Jack would be a gentleman, that late was a groom.

Jack would jet, and yet Jill said nay;
He counteth in his countenance to check with the best:
A malapert meddler that pryeth for his prey,
In a dish dare he rush at the ripest;
Dreaming in dumps to wrangle and to wrest:
He findeth a proportion in his prick-song<9>,
To drink at a draught a large and a long<10>.

Nay, jape not with him, he is no small fool,                   50
It is a solemn sire and a sullen;
For lords and ladies learn at his school;
He teacheth them so wisely to solfa and to feign,<11>
That neither they sing well prick-song nor plain:
This Doctor Deuce-ace<12> commenced in a cart,
A master, a minstrel, a fiddler, a fart.

What though ye can counter Custodi nos?<13>
As well it becometh you, a parish town clerk,
To sing Sospitati dedit aegros.<14>
Yet bear ye not too bold to brawl ne to bark                   60
At me, that meddled nothing with your work:
Correct first thyself: walk, and be nought!<15>
Deem what thou list, thou knowest not my thought.

A proverb of old: Say well or be still!
Ye are too unhappy occasions to find
Upon me to clatter, or else to say ill.
Now have I showed you part of your proud mind:
Take this in worth,<16> the best is behind!
Written at Croydon by Crowland-in-the-Clay,
On Candlemas even, the Calends of May.<17>                     70



NOTES TO AGAINST A COMELY CUSTRON

1. Custron (which Skelton uses again in his poem The Doughty Duke
of Albany, v. 171., and has Latinized in his Speak, Parrot, v. 125
is written by Chaucer quistron;

"This God of Love of his fashion
Was like no knave ne quistron,
[Ne resembloit pas un garcon]."
Rom. of the .Rose, fol. 113,-Works, ed. 1602.

Custron (Coystrowne, questron, quoitron, coestron) is-bastard,
(from quaestuaria, quae quaestu corporis vivit). "Chetif, coquin,
truant, Questron, bastart." Ducange, ed. Henschel, in v.
QAESTUARIUS.

Currishly countered-In Prompt. Parv. we find "Countering in song.
Occento." ed. 1499. To counter is properly-to sing an
extemporaneous part upon the plain chant. Skelton uses the word in
other places, and perhaps not always in its strict sense.

2. In peevishness yet they snapper and fall,
Which men the eighth deadly sin call] Snapper is commonly
explained-stumble; but Palsgrave makes a distinction between the
words: "I Snapper, as a horse doth that trippeth, Je trippette. My
horse did not stumble, he did but snapper a little, Mon cheval ne
choppit point, il ne fit que trippetter un petit." Palsgrave,
L'Éclaircissement de la Langue Française, par Jean Palsgrave, ed.
F. Génin. Paris, 1852. p. 723. Compare the following lines;

"Not say I this but well percase that I
In peevish sin might hap me in a sweven,
Which is the viii sin to sins vii."
Poems by C. Duke of Orleans, MS. Harl. 682. fol. 145.

3. carp] Which generally means speak, talk,-is sometimes found
applied to music, and here, perhaps, is equivalent to-make a
noise.

4. Lo, Jack would be a gentleman!] So in Heywood's Dialogue;

"Jack would be a gentleman, if he could speak French."
Sig. D 2,-Works, ed. 1598.

See also Ray's Proverbs, p. 124. ed. 1768.

5. Hey, trolly, lolly,] Ritson observes, is a chorus or burden "of
vast antiquity;" see Anc. Songs, ii. 8. ed. 1829:

6. knack] i.e. triflingly, or affectedly show off his skill in
singing about, &c.

7. Martin Swart] In A very merry and Pithy Comedy, called The
longer thou livest, the more fool thou art, &c. Newly compiled by 
W. Wager, 4to. n. d. (written in the early part of Elizabeth's
reign), Moros sings, among other fragments of songs,

"Martin swart and his man, sodledum, sodledum,
Martin swart and his man, sodledum bell."
Sig. A 3.

and in a comparatively recent drama we find;

"The Bear, the Boar, and Talbot with his tuskish white,
Oh so sore that he would bite,
The Talbot with his Tuskish white,
Soudledum Soudledum;
The Talbot with his Tuskish white, Soudledum bell.
The Talbot with his Tuskish white,
Oh so sore that he would bite,
Orebecke soudledum, sing orum bell."
The Variety (by the Duke of Newcastle), 1649. 12mo. p. 41.

Martin Swart, "a noble man in Germany, and in martial feats very
expert," (Hall's Chron. (Henry VII.) fol. ix. ed. 1548), headed
the auxiliaries sent by the Duchess of Burgundy with Lambert
Simnel, and fell, fighting with great valour, at the battle of
Stoke.

8. pyrdewy] Compare Hycke Scorner;

"Then into love's dance we were brought,
That we played the pyrdewy.
Sig. A v. ed. W. de Word.

and Colkelbie Sow;

"Sum Perdowy, sum Trolly lolly."
v. 303. Laing's Early Pop. Poet. Of Scotland.

9. prick-song] i.e. music pricked or noted down; when opposed to
plain song, it meant counter-point, as distinguished from mere
melody.

10. a large and a long] Characters in old music: one large
contained two longs, one long two breves, &c.

11. feign] Palsgrave gives, "I feign in singing, Je chante a basse
voix. We may not sing out, we are too near my lord, but let us
feign this song," &c., p. 548. But here, I apprehend, feign can
only mean-sing in falsetto. Our author, in The Bowge of Court, has

"His throat was clear, and lustily could feign."
v. 233.

12. doctor Deuce-ace] Deuce-ace was a dice throw of a one and a
two-a losing throw, depending on the game. So again Skelton in his
Colyn Cloute,

"Avaunt, sir doctor Deuce-ace!"
v. 1159.

Compare a much later writer:

"What, a grave Doctor, a base John Doleta the Almanack-maker,
Doctor Deuce-ace and Doctor Merryman?" Nash's Have with you to
Saffron-Walden, 1596. sig. L 3

13. Custodi nos?] Custodi nos, Domine ("Protect us, O Lord") is a
plain chant hymn.

14. Sospitati dedit aegros] ("The sick are restored to health") is
from the plainchant Sequence ofSst.Nicholas of Bari."

15. walk, and be nought!] Equivalent to-away, and a mischief on
you!

16. Take this in worth] To take in worth, or in gree, is to accept
favourably, be satisfied with.

17. Written at Croydon by Crowland-in-the-Clay,
On Candlemas even, the Calends of May] To G. Steinman Steinman,
Esq., author of the Hist. of Croydon, I am indebted for the
following observations: "The passage has been a puzzle to me. The
distance is very great between Crowland and Croydon in
Cambridgeshire; and in Croydon in Surrey there is no such place as
Crowland, though I can point out to you the Clays there. The manor
of Crouham is in the Surrey Croydon, but far away from the
Clays:'" [Perhaps two distant places are purposely brought
together for grotesque effect. This would be in the same humour as
the confusion of times in the next line, "Candelmas even, the
Kalends of May:" which expression, it may be observed, occurs also
in the Interlude of Thersytes, obviously written in imitation of
Skelton.

"Writing at my house on Candelmas day,
Midsummer month, the Calends of May.]



UPON A DEAD MAN'S HEAD

SKELTON, LAUREATE

Upon a dead man's head that was sent to him from an honourable
gentlewoman for a token, devised this ghostly meditation in
English convenable, in sentence commendable, lamentable,
lacrimable, profitable for the soul.

YOUR ugly token
My mind hath broken
From worldly lust:
For I have discussed
We are but dust,
And die we must.

It is general
To be mortal:
I have well espied
No man may him hide                                            10
From Death hollow-eyed,
With sinews withered,
With bones shidered,
With his worm-eaten maw,
And his ghastly jaw
Gasping aside,
Naked of hide,
Neither flesh nor fell.

Then, by my counsel,
Look that ye spell                                             20
Well this gospel:
For whereso we dwell
Death will us quell,
And with us mell.

For all our pampered paunches
There may no fraunches,
Nor worldly bliss,
Redeem us from this:
Our days be dated
To be checkmated <1>                                           30
With draughts of death
Stopping our breath:
Our eyes sinking,
Our bodies stinking,
Our gums grinning,
Our souls brinning.
To whom, then, shall we sue,
For to have rescue,
But to sweet Jesu
On us then for to rue?                                         40

O goodly Child
Of Mary mild,
Then be our shield!
That we be not exiled
To the dyne dale
Of bootless bale,
Nor to the lake
Of fiends black.

But grant us grace
To see thy face,                                               50
And to purchase
Thine heavenly place,
And thy palace
Full of solace
Above the sky
That is so high;
Eternally
To behold and see
The Trinity!
Amen.

Myrres vous y.<2>



NOTES TO UPON A DEAD MAN'S HEAD

1. Checkmated] The term at chess when the king is made prisoner,
and the game consequently finished, is often used figuratively by
our early writers. With the present lines compare the following
passages:

"With a draught he was checkmate.
King Robert of Sicily,-MS. Harl. 1701. fol. 93.

"But she had taken such cold for the default of help that deep
draughts of death took her, that needs she must die," &c.
Morte d'Arthur, B. via. c. i. vol. i. 247. ed. Southey.

2. Myrres vous y] "Behold yourself therein" (Carl Woodring)



WOMANHOOD, WANTON, YE WANT

WOMANHOOD, wanton, ye want;
Your meddling, mistress, is mannerless;
Plenty of ill, of goodness scant,
Ye rail at riot, reckless:
To praise your port it is needless;
For all your draff yet and your dregs,
As well borne as ye full oft time begs.

Why so coy and full of scorn?
Mine horse is sold, I ween, you say;
My new furred gown, when it is worn,                           10
Put up your purse, ye shall none pay.
By creed, I trust to see the day,
As proud a pea-hen as ye spread,
Of me and other ye may have need.

Though angelic be your smiling,
Yet is your tongue an adder's tail,
Full like a scorpion stinging
All those by whom ye have avail.
Good mistress Anne, there ye do shail:<1>
What prate ye, pretty pigsney?                                 20
I trust to quite you ere I die.

Your key is meet for every lock,
Your key is common and hangeth out;
Your key is ready, we need not knock,
Nor stand long wresting there about;
Of your door-gate ye have no doubt:
But one thing is, that ye be lewd:
Hold your tongue now, all beshrewed!

To Mistress Anne, that farly sweet,
That wonnes at The Key in Thames Street.                       30



NOTES TO WOMANHOOD, WANTON, YE WANT

1. Shail is several times used by Skelton. "Shailer, that goeth
awry with his feet, boiteux." Palsgrave, p. 266. "I Shail, as a
man or horse doth that goeth crooked with his legs: Je vas
eschais." p. 700.



DIVERS BALLADS AND DITTIES SOLACIOUS

[A tract so entitled, of four leaves, n.d. and without printer's
name, but evidently from the press of Pynson, consists of the
following five pieces]

Here followeth divers ballads and ditties solacious, devised by
Master Skelton, Laureate.

MY DARLING DEAR, MY DAISY FLOWER

WITH lullay, lullay, like a child,
Thou sleepest too long, thou art beguiled.

My darling dear, my daisy flower,
Let me, quod he, lie in your lap.
Lie still, quod she, my paramour,
Lie still hardly, and take a nap.
His head was heavy, such was his hap,
All drowsy dreaming, drowned in sleep,
That of his love he took no keep,
With hey lullay, &c.

With ba, ba, ba! and bas, bas, bas,<1>
She cherished him both cheek and chin,<2>
That he wist never where he was;                               10
He had forgotten all deadly sin.<3>
He wanted wit her love to win:
He trusted her payment and lost all his pray:<4>
She left him sleeping and stole away.
With hey lullay, &c.

The rivers rowth, the waters wan,<5>
She spared not to wet her feet;
She waded over, she found a man
That halsed her heartily and kissed her sweet:
Thus after her cold she caught a heat.
My love, she said, routeth in his bed;                         20
Ywis he hath an heavy head.
With hey lullay, &c.

What dreamest thou, drunkard, drowsy pate?
Thy lust and liking<6> is from thee gone;
Thou blinkard blow-bowl<7>, thou wakest too late,
Behold thou liest, luggard, alone!
Well may thou sigh, well may thou groan,
To deal with her so cowardly:
Ywis, pole hatchet,<8> she bleared thine eye.<9>



THE ANCIENT ACQUAINTANCE, MADAM, BETWEEN US TWAIN

THE ancient acquaintance, madam, between us twain,
The familiarity, the former dalliance,
Causeth me that I cannot myself refrain
But that I must write for my pleasant pastance:
Remembering your passing goodly countenance,
Your goodly port, your beauteous visage,
Ye may be counted comfort of all courage.

Of all your features favourable to make true description,
I am insufficient to make such enterprise;
For this dare I say, without contradiction,                    10
That Dame Menolope <10> was never half so wise:
Yet so it is that a rumour beginneth for to rise
How in good horsemen ye set your whole delight,
And have forgotten your old true loving knight.

With bound and rebound, bouncingly take up
His gentle curtal, and set nought by small nags!
Spur up at the hinder girth, with, Gup, morel, gup!
With, Joyst ye,<11> jennet of Spain, for your tail wags!
Ye cast all your courage upon such courtly hags.<12>
Have in sergeant farrier,<13> mine horse behind is bare;       20
He rideth well the horse,but he rideth better the mare.

Ware, ware the mare winceth with her wanton heel!
She kicketh with her calkins and caleth with a clench;
She goeth wide behind, and heweth never a deal:
Ware galling in the withers, ware of that wrench!
It is parlous for a horseman to dig in the trench.
This grieveth your husband, that right gentle knight,
And so with your servants he fiercely doth fight.

So fiercely he fighteth, his mind is so fell,
That he driveth them down with dints on their day-watch;       30
He bruiseth their brainpans and maketh them to swell,
Their brows all to-broken,<14> such claps they catch;
Whose jealousy malicious maketh them to leap the hatch;<15>
By their cognizance knowing how they serve a wily pie
Ask all your neighbours whether that I lie.

It can be no counsel that is cried at the cross:<16>
For your gentil husband sorrowful am I;
Howbeit, he is not first hath had a loss.
Advertising you, madam, to work more secretly,
Let not all the world make an outcry:                          40
Play fair play, madam, and look ye play clean,
Or else with great shame your game will be seen.

Qd. Skelton, Laureat.



KNOWLEDGE, ACQUAINTANCE, RESORT, FAVOUR WITH GRACE

KNOWLEDGE, acquaintance, resort, favour with grace;
Delight, desire, respite with liberty;
Courage with lust, convenient time and space;
Disdains, distress, exiled cruelty;
Words well set with good hability;
Demure demeanour, womanly of port;
Transcending pleasure, surmounting all disport;

Electuary arrected to redress
These fervorous axes, the deadly woe and pain
Of thoughtful hearts plunged in distress;<17>                  10
Refreshing minds the April shower of rain;
Conduit of comfort, and well most sovereign;
Arbour enverdured, continual fresh and green;
Of lusty summer the passing goodly queen;

The topaz rich and precious in virtue;
Your ruddies with ruddy rubies may compare;
Sapphire of sadness,<18> enveined with indy<19> blue;
The polished pearl your whiteness doth declare;
Diamond pointed to rase out heartly care;
Gainst surfeitous suspect the emerald commendable;             20
Relucent smaragd,<20> object incomparable;

Encircled mirror and perspective<21> most bright,
Illumined with features far passing my report;
Radiant Hesperus, star of the cloudy night,
Lodestar to light these lovers to their port,
'Gainst dangerous storms their anchor of support,
Their sail of solace most comfortably clad,
Whch to behold maketh heavy hearts glad:

Remorse<22> have I of your most goodlihood, 
Of your behaviour courteous and benign,                        30
Of your bounty and of your womanhood,
Which maketh my heart oft to leap and spring,
And to remember many a pretty thing.
But absence, alas, with trembling fear and dread
Abasheth me, albeit I have no need.

You I assure, absence is my foe,
My deadly woe, my painful heaviness;
And if ye list to know the cause why so,
Open mine heart, behold my mind express:
I would ye could! then should ye see, mistress,                40
How there nis thing that I covet so fain
As to embrace you in mine arms twain.

Nothing earthly to me more desirous
Than to behold your beauteous countenance:
But, hateful absence, to me so envious,
Though thou withdraw me from her by long distance,
Yet shall she never out of remembrance;
For I have graved her within the secret wall
Of my true heart, to love her best of all!

Qd. Skelton, Laureat.



THOUGH YE SUPPOSE ALL JEOPARDIES ARE PAST

CUNCTA licet cecidisse putas discrimina rerum,
Et prius incerta nunc tibi certa manent,
Consiliis usure meis tamen aspice caute,
Subdola non fallat to dea fraude sua:
Saepe solet placido mortales fallere vultu,
Et cute sub placida tabida saepe dolent;
Ut quando secura putas et cuncta serena,
Anguis sub viridi gramine saepe latet.<23>

Though ye suppose all jeopardies are past,
And all is done that ye looked for before,                     10
Ware yet, I rede you, of Fortune's double cast,
For one false point she is wont to keep in store,
And under the fell oft festered is the sore:
That when ye think all danger for to pass
Ware of the lizard<24> lieth lurking in the grass

Qd. Skelton, Laureat.



GO, PITEOUS HEART, RASED WITH DEADLY WOE

Go, piteous heart, rased with deadly woe,
Pierced with pain, bleeding with wounds smart,
Bewail thy fortune, with veins wan and blo.
O Fortune unfriendly, Fortune unkind thou art,
To be so cruel and so overthwart,
To suffer me so careful to endure
That where I love best I dare not discure!

One there is, and ever one shall be,
For whose sake my heart is sore diseased;
For whose love, welcome disease to me!                         10
I am content so all parties be pleased:
Yet, an God would, I would my pain were eased!
But Fortune enforceth me so carefully to endure
That where I love best I dare not discure.

Skelton, Laureate.
At the instance of a noble lady.



NOTES TO DIVERS BALLADS AND DITTIES SOLACIOUS

1. With ba, ba, ba, and bas, bas, bas] i e. With kissings,-with,
kiss me.

2. She cherished him both cheek and chin]

"Come near my spouse,: and let me ba thy cheek"
Chaucer's Wife of Bath's Prol. v. 6015. ed. Tyr.

"I would him chuck, cheek and chin, and cherish him so mickle."
Dunbar's Tale of The Two Married Women and the Widow,-Poems, i.
71. ed. Laing.

3. He had forgotten all deadly sin] Compare our author's Philip
Sparow, v. 1081.

4. pray] Qy. "pay"?

5. waters wan] Many passages of our early poetry might be cited
where this epithet is applied to water: see note 115 to Why come
ye not to Court, where a wrong reading has misled H. Tooke and.
Richardson.

6. lust and liking] i.e pleasure and delight. This somewhat
pleonastic expression (used again more than once by Skelton) is
not uncommon in our old writers: "Alas! my sweet sons, then she
said, for your sakes I shall lose my liking and lust." Morte
d'Arthur, B. xi. c. x. vol. ii. 174. ed. Southey. Nay, in the
interlude of The World and the Child, 1522, one of the characters
bears the name of Lust and Liking.

7. blow-bowl] i.e. drunkard.

"To blow in a bowl, and for to pill a platter," &c.
Barclay's First Egloge, sig. A iiii. ed. 1570.

"Farewell! Peter blow-bowl I may well call thee."
Interlude of King Darius, 1565. sig. B.

8. pole hatchet] "An opprobrious appellation" (OED). So again in
our author's Garland of Laurel;

"Pole hatchets, that prate will at every ale pole."
v. 613

9. bleared thine eye] i e. imposed on, put a cheat on you.

10. Menolope] In a "ballade" entitled The IX Ladies Worthy,
printed among Chaucer's Works, the writer, after celebrating the
eighth, "Queen Semiramis," concludes thus;

"Also the lady Menalip thy sister dear,
Whose martial power no man could withstand,
Through the world was not found her peer,
The famous duke Theseus she had in hand,
She chastised him and [conquered] all his land,
The proud Greeks mightily she did assail,
Overcame and vanquished them in battle."
fol. 324. ed. 1602.

[Menalippe was a sister of Antiope, queen of the Amazons, and was 
so far from subduing Theseus that she was taken prisoner by
Hercules. Penelope is a more probable reading.]

11. Gup, morel, gup!
With, Joyst ye,] Gup [go up?] and joyst [stand still?] are
exclamations applied to horses; compare our author's Elynour
Rummyng, v. 390, and his third Poem against Garnesche, v. 13 So
too in Camelles Rejoinder to Churchyarde (fol. broadside);

"Then gip fellow ass, then joist fellow lurdan."

12. hags] I know not in what sense Skelton uses this word: [Qy.
youth, hero, gallant?] so again in his Colyn Cloute;

"I purpose to shake out
All my cunning bag,
Like a clerkly hag."
v. 50.

and in his poem The Doughty Duke of Albany;

"For thou can not but brag,
Like a Scottish hag."
v. 294

13. Have in sergeant farrier] i.e. Bring in sergeant farrier. The
title sergeant belongs properly to certain of the king's servants:
so in an unpublished Liber Excerpt. Temp. Hen. vii. et Hen. viii.
in the Chapter-house, Westminster;

(xix. of Hen. vii) "Item paid to the sergeant plumber and Bartram
upon their indentures for Greenwich - xx li."

14. all to-broken] A writer in the new ed. Of Boucher's. Gloss.
(in v. All) justly observes that it is a mistake to "suppose that
in such expressions all is coupled with to, and that it becomes
equivalent to omnino from being thus conjoined. The augmentative
to is connected with the following word as a prefix, and often
occurs without being preceded by all: so in our author's Bowge of
Courte,

"A rusty gallant, to-ragged and to-rent."-
v. 345.

15. to leap the hatch] i.e., to run away (hatch-the fastened half
or part of the door, the half-door).
"I pretend [i.e. intend] therefore to leap over the hatch.",
The Trial of Treasure, 1567. sig..E ii.

16. It can be no counsel that is cried at the cross] i.e. It can
be no secret that is proclaimed at the market-place.

17. Of thoughtful hearts plunged in distress] Skelton borrowed
this line from Lydgate, whose Life of our Lady begins

"O thoughtful heart plunged in distress."

Thoughtful is anxious, heavy, sad.

18. Sapphire of sadness]-sadness, i.e. steadiness, constancy:

"For it is writ and said how the sapphire
Doth token truth."
Poems by C. Duke of Orleans,-MS. Hart. 682. fol. 44.

19. Indy] "Inde. Fr., Azure-coloured." Tyrwhitt's Gloss. to
Chaucer's Cant. Tales. "Inde, ynde: coleur de bleu foncé, d'azur,
indicum." Roquefort's Gloss. De la Lang. Rom. So again our author
in his Magnificence;

"The strings of her veins as azure indy blue."
v. 1571.

See too his Garland of Laurel, v. 478. and Nevil, son of Lord
Latimer, in a poem of great rarity;

"On the gates two scriptures I espied,
Them for to rede my mind then I applied
Writen in gold and indy blue for folks' furtherance."
The Castle of pleasure, sig. A v. 1518.

Sir John Mandeville says that the beak of the Phoenix "is coloured
blue as inde." Voyage and Travel, &c., p. 58. ed. 1725.

20. the emerald commendable;
Relucent smaragd,] Emerald and smaragd are generally considered as
synonymous; but here Skelton makes a distinction between them. So
too Drayton in his Muses Elizium, 1630. p. 78; and Chamberlayne in
his Pharonnida, 1659. B. ii. c. 4. p. 150. And so R. Holme "The
Emerald is green."-"The Smaragd is of an excellent fresh green,
far passing any Leaf." Ac. of Armory, 1688. B. ii. pp. 39, 41.

21. perspective] Which generally signifies a glass to look
through, seems here, from the context, to mean some sort of
reflecting glass.

22. Remorse] Means commonly in early writers,-pity; but that sense
is unsuited to the present passage: it seems to be used here for-
[a painful] recollection.

23. CUNCTA licet, &c.] The lines following in English are a
translation of the Latin.

24. lizard] In the Latin above, the corresponding word is anguis:
long after Skelton's time, the poor harmless lizard was reckoned
venomous; so in Shakespeare's Third Part of Henry VI., act ii. sc.
2., "lizards dreadful stings."



MANNERLY MARGERY MILK AND ALE

[From the Fairfax MS., which formerly belonged to Ralph Thoresby,
and now forms part of the Additional MSS. (5465. Fol. 109) in the
British Museum. It was printed (together with the music) by
Hawkins, Hist. of Music, iii. 2. This song was inserted also in
the first edition of Ancient Songs, 1790, p.100, by Ritson, who
observes,- "Since Sir J. Hawkins's transcript was made, the MS.
appears to have received certain alterations, occasioned, as it
should seem, but certainly not authorised, by the over-scrupulous
delicacy of its late or present possessor". p.102.]

<1>
AY, beshrew you, by my fay,
These wanton clerks be nice alway;<2>
Avaunt, avaunt, my popinjay!
What, will ye do nothing but play?
Tully vally,<3> straw, let be I say!
Gup, Christian Clout,<4> gup, Jack of the Vale!<5>
With, Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale.

By God, ye be a pretty pode,
And I love you an whole cart-load.
Straw, James Fodder, ye play the fode,<6>                      10
I am no hackney for your rod: 
Go watch a bull, your back is broad!
Gup, Christian Clout, gup, Jack of the Vale!
With, Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale.

I wiss ye deal uncourteously;
What, would ye frumple me? now fie!
What, and ye shall be my pigsney?
By Christ, ye shall not, no hardily;
I will not be japed bodily:                                    20
Gup, Christian Clout, gup, Jack of the Vale!
With, Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale.

Walk forth your way, ye cost me nought;
Now have I found that I have sought:
The best cheap<7> flesh that ever I bought.
Yet, for His love that all hath wrought,
Wed me, or else I die for thought!<8>
Gup, Christian Clout, your breath is stale!
Go, Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale!
Gup, Christian Clout, gup, Jack of the Vale!                   30
With, Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale.



NOTES TO MANNERLY MARGERY MILK AND ALE

1. Skelton mentions this piece among his works, in the Garland of
Laurel, v. 1198. Sir John Hawkins, who printed it together with
the music, says that it "appears to have been set by William
Cornish of the Chapel Royal in the reign of Henry vii." Hist. of
Music, iii. 2.

2. These wanton clerks be nice alway] i.e. These wanton scholars
be always foolish, inclined to folly, to toyish tricks: compare
our author's Philip Sparrow;

"Philip, though he were nice
In him it was no vice," &c.
v. 173.

3. Tully vally] Or Tilly vally-an exclamation of contempt, the
origin of which is doubtful.

4. Christian Cloute] Compare our author's Colyn Cloute;

"He could not sing himself therout
But by the help of Christian Cloute."
v. 880

5. Jack of the vale] [The hero of some popular ditty.] So our
author in his Magnificence; "some jangling Jack of the vale," v.
260. Compare two pieces of a much later date;

"I am not now to tell a tale
Of George a Greene, or Jack a Vale."
The Odcombian Banquet, 1611. sig. C 3.

"And they had lever printen Jack a vale
Or Clim o Clough," &c.
J.Davies,-Other Eglogues annexed to The Shepherd's Pipe, 1614.
sig. G. 4.

6 Straw, James Fodder, ye play the fode] i.e. apparently,
Nonsense! James Fodder, you play the child, or fool.

7. best cheap] i.e. cheapest.

8. thought] i.e.. sadness, grief: see note 17 to Divers Ballads
and Ditties Solacious



THE BOWGE OF COURT
 [From the ed. of Wynkyn de Word, n.d., in the Advocates Library,
Edinburgh, collated with another ed. by Wynkyn de Worde in the
Public Library, Cambridge, and with Marsh's ed. of Skelton's
Works, 1568.]

<1>

HERE BEGINNETH A LITTLE TREATISE
NAMED
THE BOWGE OF COURT.

THE PROLOGUE TO THE BOWGE OF COURT.

IN autumn, when the sun in Virgine
By radiant heat enriped hath our corn;
When Luna, full of mutability,
As empress the diadem hath worn
Of our pole arctic, smiling half in scorn
At our folly and our unsteadfastness;
The time when Mars to war him did dress;

I, calling to mind the great authority
Of poets old, which full craftily,
Under as covert terms as could be,                             10
Can touch a truth and cloak it subtilly
With fresh utterance full sententiously,
Diverse in style, some spared not vice to write,
Some of morality nobly did indite;

Whereby I rede their renown and their fame
May never die, but evermore endure.
I was sore moved to aforce the same,
But Ignorance full soon did me discure,
And showed that in this art I was not sure;
For to illumine, she said, I was too dull,                     20
Advising me my pen alway to pull,

And not to write: for he so will attain
Exceeding further than his conning is,
His head may be hard, but feeble is his brain,
Yet have I known such ere this;
But of reproach surely he may not miss,
That climbeth higher than he may footing have:
What an he slide down, who shall him save?

Thus up and down my mind was drawn and cast,
That I ne wist what to do was best;                            30
So sore enwearied<2>, that I was at the last
Enforced to sleep and for to take some rest,
And to lie down as soon as I me dressed.
At Harwich port slumbering as I lay
In mine host's house, called Power's Quay,

Methought I saw a ship, goodly of sail,
Come sailing forth into the haven broad,
Her tackling rich and of high appareil:<3>
She cast an anchor, and there she lay at road.
Merchants her boarded to see what she had load:                40
Therein they found royal merchandise,
Freighted with pleasure of what ye could devise.

But then I thought I would not dwell behind
Among all others I put myself in press<4>.
Then there could I none acquaintance find:
There was much noise; anon one cried, Cease!
Sharply commanding each man hold his peace:
Masters, he said, the ship that ye here see
The Bowge of Court it hight for certainty:

The owner thereof is lady of estate                            50
Whose name to tell is Dame Sans-peer;
Her merchandise is rich and fortunate,
But who will have it must pay therefor dear;
This royal chaffer that is shipped here
Is called Favour, to stand in her good grace.
Then should ye see there pressing in apace

Of one and other that would this lady see;
Which sat behind a travis<5> of silk fine,
Of gold of tissue the finest that might be,
In a throne which far clearer did shine                        60
Than Phoebus in his sphere celestine;
Whose beauty, honour, goodly port
I have too little cunning to report.

But of each thing there as I took heed,
Among all other was written in her throne
In gold letters, these words, which I did read:
Gardez le fortune, qui est mauvais et bon!<6>
And, as I stood reading this verse myself alone,
Her chief gentlewoman, Danger by her name,
Gave me a taunt, and said I was to blame                       70

To be so pert to press so proudly up:
She said she trowed that I had eaten sauce;<7>
She asked if ever I drank of sauce's cup.
And I then softly answered to that clause,
That, so to say, I had given her no cause.
Then asked she me, Sir, so God thee speed,
What is thy name? and I said, it was Dread.

What moved thee, quod she, hither to come?
Forsooth, quod I, to buy some of your ware.
And with that word on me she gave a glum                       80
With browes bent, and gan on me to stare
Full dainously, and fro me she did fare,
Leaving me standing as a mazed man:
To whom there came another gentlewoman;

Desire her name was, and so she me told,
Saying to me, Brother, be of good cheer,
Abash you not, but hardily be bold,
Advance yourself to approach and come near:
What though our chaffer be never so dear,
Yet I advise you to speak, for any dread:<8>                   90
Who spareth to speak, in faith, he spareth to speed.

Mistress, quod I, I have none acquaintance
That will for me be mediator and mean;
And this another, I have but small substance.
Peace, quod Desire, ye speak not worth a bean:<9>
If ye have not, in faith, I will you lene
A precious jewel, no richer in this land;
Bon Aventure have here now in your hand

Shift now therewith, let see, as ye can
In Bowge of Court chevisaunce to make;                        100
For I dare say that there nis earthly man
But, an he can Bon Aventure take,
There can no favour nor friendship him forsake;
Bon Aventure may bring you in such case 
That ye shall stand in favour and in grace

But of one thing I warn you ere I go:
She that steereth the ship, make her your friend.
Mistress, quod I, I pray you tell me why so,
And how I may that way and means find.
Forsooth, quod she, however blow the wind,                    110
Fortune guideth and ruleth all our ship:
Whom she hateth shall over the seaboard skip;

Whom she loveth, of all pleasure is rich,
Whiles she laugheth and hath lust for to play;
Whom she hateth, she casteth in the ditch,
For when she frowneth, she thinketh to make a fray;
She cherisheth him, and him she casteth away.
Alas, quod I, how might I have her sure?
In faith, quod she, by Bon Aventure.

Thus, in a row, of merchants a great rout                     120
Sued to Fortune that she would be their friend:
They throng in fast, and flocked her about;
And I with them prayed her to have in mind.
She promised to us all she would be kind:
Of Bowge of Court she asketh what we would have,
And we asked Favour, and Favour she us gave.

Thus endeth the Prologue; and beginneth the Bowge of Court briefly
compiled.

DREAD

The sail is up, Fortune ruleth our helm,
We want no wind to pass now over all;
Favour we have tougher than any elm,
That will abide and never from us fall;                       130
But under honey ofttime lieth bitter gall;
For, as methought, in our ship I did see
Full subtle persons, in number four and three.

The first was Favell, full of flattery,
With fables false that well could feign a tale;
The second was Suspect, which that daily
Misdeemed each man, with face deadly and pale;
And Harvy Hafter,<10> that well could pick a male;
With other four of their affinity,
Disdain, Riot, Dissimuler, Subtlety.                          140

Fortune their friend, with whom oft she did dance;
They could not fail, they thought, they were so sure;
And oftentimes I would myself advance
With them to make solace and pleasure;
But my disport they could not well endure;
They said they hated for to deal with Dread.
Then Favell gan with fair speech me to feed.

FAVELL

No thing earthly that I wonder so sore
As of your conning, that is so excellent;
Dainty to have with us such one in store,<11>                 150
So virtuously that hath his days spent;
Fortune to you gifts of grace hath lent:
Lo, what it is a man to have conning!
All earthly treasure it is surmounting.

Ye be an apt man, as any can be found,
To dwell with us, and serve my lady's grace;
Ye be to her, yea, worth a thousand pound;
I heard her speak of you within short space,
When there were divers that sore did you menace;
And, though I say it, I was myself your friend,               160
For here be divers to you that be unkind.

But this one thing-ye may be sure of me;
For, by that Lord that bought dear all mankind,
I cannot flatter, I must be plain to thee;
An ye need ought, man, show to me your mind,
For ye have me whom faithful ye shall find;
Whiles I have ought, by God, thou shalt not lack,
And if need be, a bold word I dare crack.

Nay, nay, be sure, whiles I am on your side
Ye may not fall, trust me, ye may not fail.                   170
Ye stand in favour, and Fortune is your guide,
And, as she will, so shall our great ship sail:
These lewd cockwats<12> shall nevermore prevail
Against you hardily, therefore be not afraid.
Farewell till soon, but no word that I said.

DREAD

Then thanked I him for his great gentleness.
But, as methought, he wore on him a cloak
That lined was with doubtful doubleness;
Methought, of words that he had full a poke;
His stomach stuffed oft times did reboke.<13>                 180
Suspicion, methought, met him at a braid,
And I drew near to hark what they two said.

In faith, quod Suspect, spake Dread no word of me?
Why? what then? wilt thou let men to speak?
He saith he cannot well accord with thee.
Twist, quod Suspect, go play! him I ne reck!
By Christ, quod Favell, Dread is sullen freke.
What, let us hold him up, man, for a while?
Yea so, quod Suspect, he may us both beguile.

And when he came walking soberly,                             190
With hum and ha, and with a crooked look,
Methought his head was full of jealousy,
His eyen rolling, his hands fast they quoke;
And to meward the straight way he took:
God speed, brother! to me quod he then;
And thus to talk with me he began.

SUSPICION

Ye remember the gentleman right now
That communed with you, methought a pretty space?
Beware of him, for, I make God avow,
He will beguile you and speak fair to your face;              200
Ye never dwelt in such another place,
For here is none that dare well other trust;
But I would tell you a thing, an I durst.

Spake he, i'faith, no word to you of me?
I wot, an he did, ye would me tell.
I have a favour to you, whereof it be
That I must show you much of my counsel:
But I wonder what the devil of hell
He said of me, when he with you did talk.
By mine advice use not with him to walk.                      210

The sovereignest thing that any man may have,
Is little to say, and much to hear and see;
For, but I trusted you, so God me save,
I would nothing so plain be;
To you only, methink, I durst shrive me;
For now am I plenarly disposed
To show you things that may not be disclosed.

DREAD

Then I assured him my fidelity
His counsel secret never to discure,
If he could find in heart to trust me;                        220
Else I prayed him, with all my busy cure,
To keep it himself, for then he might be sure
That no man earthly could him bewray,
Whiles of his mind it were locked with the key.

By God, quod he, this and thus it is;
And of his mind he showed me all and some.<14>
Farewell, quod he, we will talk more of this:
So he departed there he would be come.
I dare not speak, I promised to be dumb:
But, as I stood musing in my mind,                            230
Harvy Hafter came leaping, light as lind.<15>

Upon his breast he bore a versing-box,<16>
His throat was clear, and lustily could feign.
Methought his gown was all furred with fox,
And ever he sang, Sith I am nothing plain.<17>
To keep him from picking it was a great pain:
He gazed on me with his goatish beard;
When I looked on him, my purse was half afeared.

HARVY HAFTER

Sir, God you save! why look ye so sad?
What thing is that I may do for you?                          240
A wonder thing that ye wax not mad!
For, an I study should as ye do now,
My wit would waste, I make God avow.
Tell me your mind: methink,ye make a verse;
I could it scan, an ye would it rehearse.

But to the point shortly to proceed,
Where hath your dwelling been ere ye came here?
For, as I trow, I have seen you indeed
Ere this, when that ye made me royal cheer.
Hold up the helm, look up, and let God steer:                 250
I would be merry, what wind that ever blow.
Heave and how rumbelow,<18> row the boat, Norman, row!<19>

Princess of Youth can ye sing by rote?<20>
Or shall I sail with you a fellowship assay;<21>
For on the book I cannot sing a note.
Would to God, it would please you some day
A ballad book before me for to lay,
And learn me to sing re, mi, fa, sol!
And, when I fail, bob me on the noll.<22>

Lo, what is to you a pleasure great                           260
To have that conning and ways that ye have!
By God's soul, I wonder how ye get
So great pleasure, or who to you it gave:
Sir, pardon me, I am an homely knave,
To be with you thus pert and thus bold;
But ye be welcome to our household.

And, I dare say, there is no man herein
But would be glad of your company:
I wist never man that so soon could win
The favour that ye have with my lady;                         270
I pray to God that it may never die:
It is your fortune for to have that grace;
As I be saved, it is a wonder case

For, as for me, I served here many a day
And yet unneth I can have my living;
But, I require you, no word that I say;<23>
For, an I know any earthly thing
That is again you, ye shall have weeting:
And ye be welcome, sir, so God me save:
I hope hereafter a friend of you to have.                     280

DREAD

With that, as he departed so from me,
Anon there met with him, as methought,
A man, but wonderly beseen was he;
He looked haughty; he set each man at nought;
His gaudy garment with scorns was all wrought;
With indignation lined was his hood;
He frowned, as he would swear by Cock's blood;

He bit the lip, he looked passing coy;
His face was belimmed, as bees had him stung:
It was no time with him to jape nor toy;                      290
Envy had wasted his liver and his lung,
Hatred by the heart so had him wrung,
That he looked pale as ashes to my sight:
Disdain, I ween, this cumbrous crab is hight.

To Harvy Hafter then he spake of me,
And I drew near to hark what they two said.
Now, quod Disdain, as I shall saved be,
I have great scorn, and am right evil payed.<24>
Then quod Harvy Hafter, Why art thou so dismayed?
By Christ, quod he, for it is shame to say;                   300
To see yon Johan Dawes<25>, that came but yesterday,

How he is now taken in conceit,
This doctor Dawcock, Dread, I ween, he hight:
By God's bones, but if we have some slight,
It is likely he will stand in your light.
By God, quod Harvy, an it so happen might;
Let us therefore shortly at a word
Find some means to cast him overboard.

By Him that me bought, then quod Disdain,
I wonder sore he is in such conceit.                          310
Turd, quod Hafter, I will thee nothing lain,
There must for him be laid some pretty bait;
We twain, I trow, be not without deceit:
First pick a quarrel, and fall out with him then,
And so outface him with a card of ten.<26>

Forthwith he made on me a proud assault
With scornful look moved all in mood;
He went about to take me in a fault;
He frowned, he stared, he stamped where he stood.
I looked on him, I weened he had been wood.                   320
He set the arm proudly under the side,
And in this wise he gan with me to chide.

DISDAIN

Rememberest thou what thou said yesternight?
Wilt thou abide by the words again?
By God, I have of thee now great despite;
I shall thee anger once in every vein:
It is great scorn to see such an hayne
As thou art, one that came but yesterday,
With us old servants such masters to play.<27>

I tell thee, I am of countenance:<28>                         330
What weenest I were? I trow thou know not me.
By God's wounds, but for displeasance,
Of my quarrel soon would I venged be:
But no force, I shall once meet with thee;
Come when it will, oppose thee I shall,
Whatsomever adventure thereof fall.

Trowest thou, drevil, I say, thou gaudy knave,
That I have deigned to see thee cherished thus?
By God's side, my sword thy beard shall shave;
Well, once thou shalt be charmed, ywis.                       340
Nay, straw for tales, thou shalt not rule us;
We be thy betters, and so thou shalt us take,
Or we shall thee out of thy clothes shake.

DREAD

With that came Riot,<29> rushing all at once,
A rusty gallant, to-ragged and to-rent;
And on the board he whirled a pair of bones,<30>
Quater trey deuce<31> he clattered as he went.
Now have at all, by Saint Thomas of Kent!<32>
And ever he threw and cast I wot ne'er what:
His hair was grown through out his hat.<33>                   350

Then I beheld how he disguised was:<34>
His head was heavy for watching over night,
His eyen bleared, his face shone like a glass;
His gown so short that it ne cover might
His rump, he went so all for summer light;<35>
His hose was garded with a list of green,<36>
Yet at the knee they were broken, I ween.

His coat was checked with patches red and blue;
Of Kirkby Kendal was his short demi;<37>
And aye he sang, In faith, deacon, thou crew;<38>             360
His elbow bare, he wore his gear so nigh;<39>
His nose a-dropping, his lips were full dry;
And by his side his whinard and his pouch,
The devil might dance therein for any crouch.<40>

Counter he could O lux upon a pot;<41>
An ostrich feather of a capon's tail
He set up freshly upon his hat aloft:
What, revel rout!<42> quod he, and gan to rail
How oft he had hit Jennet on the tail,
Of Phyllis fetis, and little pretty Kate,                     370
How oft he knocked at her clicket-gate.<43>

What should I tell more of his ribaldry?
I was ashamed so to hear him prate:
He had no pleasure but in harlotry.
Ay, quod he, in the devil's date,<44>
What art thou? I saw thee now but late.
Forsooth, quod I, in this court I dwell now.
Welcome, quod Riot, I make God avow.

RIOT

And, sir, in faith why com'st not us among,
To make thee merry, as other fellows done?                    380
Thou must swear and stare, man, all day long,
And wake all night, and sleep till it be noon;
Thou mayest not study, or muse on the moon;
This world is nothing but eat, drink, and sleep,
And thus with us good company to keep.

Pluck up thine heart upon a merry pin,<45>
And let us laugh a pluck or twain at nale:<46>
What the devil, man, mirth was never one!
What, lo man, see here of dice a bale!
A bridling-cast<47> for that is in thy male!                  390
Now have at all that lieth upon the board!
Fie on these dice, they be not worth a turd!

Have at the hazard, or at the dozen brown,<48>
Or else I pass<49> a penny to a pound!
Now, would to God, thou would lay money down!
Lord, how that I would cast it full round!
Ay, in my pouch a buckle I have found,
The arms of Calais, I have no coin nor cross!
I am not happy, I run aye on the loss.

Now run must I to the stew's side                             400
To weet if Malkin, my leman, have got aught:
I let her to hire, that men may on her ride,
Her arms' ease far and near is sought:
By God's side, since I her hither brought
She hath got me more money with her tail
Than hath some ship that into Bordeaux sail.

Had I as good an horse as she is a mare,
I durst adventure to journey through France;
Who rideth on her, he needeth not to care,
For she is trussed for to break a lance;                      410
It is a curtal that well can winch and prance;
To her will I now all my poverty allege;
And, till I come, have here is mine hat to pledge.

DREAD

Gone is this knave, this ribald foul and lewd;
He ran as fast as ever that he might:
Unthriftiness in him may well be showed,
For whom Tyburn groaneth both day and night.
And, as I stood and cast aside my sight,
Disdain I saw with Dissimulation
Standing in sad communication.                                420

But there was pointing and nodding with the head,
And many words said in secret wise;
They wandered aye, and stood still in no stead:
Methought alway Dissimuler did devise;
Me passing sore mine heart then gan agrise,<50>
I deemed and dread their talking was not good.
Anon Dissimuler came where I stood.

Then in his hood<51> I saw there faces twain;
That one was lean and like a pined ghost,
That other looked as he would me have slain;                  430
And to meward as he gan for to coast,
When that he was even at me almost,
I saw a knife hid in his one sleeve,
Whereon was written this word, Mischief.

And in his other sleeve, methought, I saw
A spoon of gold, full of honey sweet,
To feed a fool, and for to prove a daw;<52>
And on that sleeve these words were writ,
A false abstract cometh from a false concrete:
His hood was side, his cope was russet grey:                  440
These were the words that he to me did say.

DISSIMULATION

How do ye, master? ye look so soberly:
As I be saved at the dreadful day,
It is a perilous vice, this envy:
Alas, a conning man ne dwell may
In no place well, but fools with him affray!
But as for that, conning hath no foe
Save him that nought can, Scripture saith so.

I know your virtue and your literature
By that little conning that I have:                           450
Ye be maligned sore, I you assure;
But ye have craft yourself alway to save:
It is great scorn to see a misproud knave
With a clerke that cunning is to prate:
Let them go louse them, in the devil's date!

For albeit that this long not to me,
Yet on my back I bear such lewd dealing:
Right now I spake with one, I trow, I see;
But what, a straw! I may not tell all thing.
By God, I say there is great heart-burning                    460
Between the person ye wot of, [and] you;
Alas, I could not deal so with a Jew!

I would each man were as plain as I;
It is a world, I say, to hear of some:
I hate this feigning, fie upon it, fie!
A man cannot wot where to be come.
Ywis I could tell-but humlery, hum,
I dare not speak, we be so laid await,
For all our court is full of deceit.

Now by Saint Francis, that holy man and friar,                470
I hate these ways again you that they take;
Were I as you, I would ride them full near;
And, by my troth, but if an end they make,
Yet will I say some words for your sake,
That shall them anger, I hold thereon a groat;
For some shall, I ween, be hanged by the throat.

I have a stopping oyster<53> in my poke, 
Trust me, an if it come to a need:
But I am loath for to raise a smoke,
If ye could be otherwise agreed.                              480
And so I would it were, so God me speed,
For this may breed to a confusion
Without God make a good conclusion.

Nay, see where yonder standeth the t'other man!
A flattering knave and false he is, God wot;
The drevil standeth to harken, an he can:
It were more thrift he bought him a new coat;
It will not be, his purse is not on float:
All that he weareth, it is borrowed ware;
His wit is thin, his hood is threadbare.                      490

More could I say, but what this is enow:
Adieu till soon, we shall speak more of this:
Ye must be ruled as I shall tell you how;
Amends may be of that is now amiss;
And I am yours, sir, so have I bliss,
In every point that I can do or say;
Give me your hand, farewell, and have good-day.

DREAD

Suddenly, as he departed me fro,
Came pressing in one in a wonder array:
Ere I was ware, behind me he said, Bo!                        500
Then I, astonied of that sudden fray,
Start all at once, I liked nothing his play:
For, if I had not quickly fled the touch,
He had plucked out the nobles of my pouch.

He was trussed in a garment strait:
I have not seen such another page;
For he could well upon a casket wait;
His hood all pounced and garded like a cage;
Light lime-finger! he took none other wage.
Hearken, quod he, lo here mine hand in thine!                 510
To us welcome thou art, by Saint Quentin.

DECEIT

But, by that Lord that is one, two, and three,
I have an errand to round in your ear:
He told me so, by God, ye may trust me,
Pardie, remember, when ye were there,
There I winked on you-wot ye not where?
In A loco, I mean juxta B:
Woe is him that is blind and may not see!

But to hear the subtlety and the craft,
As I shall tell you, if ye will hark again;                   520
And, when I saw the whoreson would you haft,
To hold mine hand, by God, I had great pain;
For forthwith there I had him slain,
But that I dread murder would come out:
Who dealeth with shrews hath need to look about.

DREAD

And as he rounded<54> thus in mine ear
Of false collusion confettered by assent,
Methought, I see lewd fellows here and there
Come for to slay me of mortal intent;
And, as they came, the shipboard fast I hent,                 530
And thought to leap; and even with that woke,
Caught pen and ink, and wrote this little book.

I would therewith no man were miscontent,
Beseeching you that shall it see or read
In every point to be indifferent,
Sith all in substance of slumbering doth proceed.
I will not say it is matter indeed,
But yet oft-time such dreams be found true.
Now construe ye what is the residue!

Thus endeth the Bowge of Court



NOTES TO THE BOWGE OF COURT.

1. "It is a bowge of court. Ceremonia aulica est." Hormanni
Vulgaria, sig. s iii. ed. 1530. "Bouche à Court. Budge-a-Court,
diet allowed at Court." Cotgrave's Dict. "The Kings Archers . . .,
had Bouch of Court (to wit, Meat and Drink) and great Wages of six
Pence by the Day." Stow's Survey, B. vi. 49. ed. 1720. [Probably
from old French, bouge, kitchen.] "The poem called the BOUGE OF
COURT, or the Rewards of a Court, is in the manner of a pageant,
consisting of seven personifications. Here our author, in adopting
the more grave and stately movement of the seven lined stanza, has
shown himself not always incapable of exhibiting allegorical
imagery with spirit and dignity. But his comic vein predominates."
Warton's Hist. of E. P., ii. 347. ed. 4to.

"Bouge of Court, a corruption of bouche, Fr. An allowance of meat
and drink for the tables of the inferior officers, and others who
were occasionally called to serve and entertain the court. Skelton
has a kind of little drama called Bouge of Court, from the name of
the ship in which the dialogue takes place. It is a very severe
satire, full of strong painting, and, excellent poetry. The
courtiers of Harry must have winced at it." Gifford, note on Ben
Jonson's Works, vii. 428.

2. sore enwearied]- enwearied means simply-wearied. Richardson
(Dict. in v. En) observes that "Skelton appears to have wantoned
in such compounds."

3. Methought I saw a ship, goodly of sail,
Come sailing forth into the haven broad,
Her tackling rich and of high appareil] Of this passage Mr.
Wordsworth has a recollection in one of his noble Sonnets;

"A goodly Vessel did I then espy
Come like a giant from a haven broad;
And lustily along the bay she strode,
Her tackling rich, and of apparel high."
Works, iii. 34. ed. 1836.

4. I put myself in press] i.e. I joined the throng.

5. Gardez le fortune, qui est mauvais et bon!] "Beware of Fortune,
which is both bad and good!"

6. travis] Means here a sort of low curtain or screen -Hall,
describing the preparations for combat between the Dukes of
Hereford and Norfolk, tells us that the former, having entered the
lists, "sat him down in a chair of green velvet which was set in a
travis of green and blew velvet," &c.; and that the latter "sat
down in his chair which was Crimson Velvet, curtained about with
white and red Damask." Chron. (Henry IV. ) fol. iii. ed. 1548.-At
a later period, curtains, which were used on the stage as
substitutes for scenes, were called traverses. See also Singer's
note on Cavendish's Life of Wolsey, p. 167. ed. 1827, and Sir H.
Nicolas's note on Privy Purse Expenses of Elizabeth of York, p.
259.

7. she trowed that I had eaten sauce] Compare our author's
Magnificence:

Ye have eaten sauce, I trow, at the Taylors Hall." 
v. 1421.

8. I advise you to speak, for any dread] i.e. I advise you to
speak, notwithstanding any dread you may feel.

9. not worth a bean] Bean is frequently used by our early poets to
express any thing worthless:

"I give not of her harm a bean."
Chaucer's Rom. of the Rose,- Works, fol. 137. ed. 1602.

10. Harvy Hafter] Hafter i.e. sharper, cheat. Eds., have "Harvy
Haster;" and in the fourth of Skelton's Poems against Garnesche,
v. 164 the MS. gives the name with the same error. Compare our
author's Why come ye not to Court;

"Havell and Harvy Hafter."
v. 94

and his Magnificence;

"Now, benedicite, ye ween I were some hafter."
v. 259

"Crafting and hafting contrived is by me."
v. 707.

"For to use such hafting and crafty ways."
v. 1698

"And from crafters and hafters I you forfend."
v. 2485


11. Dainty to have with us such one in store] Dainty means often-
pleasant, "nice." But both in the present passage, and in a
subsequent stanza of the same poem-

"Trowest thou, drevil, I say, thou gaudy knave,
That I have dainty to see thee cherished thus?"
v. 337

Dainty seems to be equivalent to-pleasure: compare

Because that he hath joy and great dainty
To read in books of old antiquity."
Lydgate's Wars of Troy (Prologue), sig. B i. ed. 1555.

"Adieu, dolour, adieu! my dainty now begins."
Dunbar's tale of The Two Married Women and the Widow,-Poems, i.
76. ed. Laing.

12. cockwats] Compare our author's third copy of verses Against
venomous tongues;

"Than ye may command me to gentle cockwat."
v. 15

and his Magnificence;

"What canst thou do but play cockwat "
v. 1206.

Is cockwat only another form of cockward, i.e. cuckold? See Arthur
and the King of Cornwall, p. 279, Sir Gawayne, &c., edited by Sir
F. Madden.

13. reboke] i.e. belch, cast up.

"As grunting and drinking, reboking up again."
Barclay's Ship of Fools, fol. 229. ed. 1570.

14. all and some] Another expression frequently used by our early
poets. "All and some: Tout entierement." Palsgrave, p. 847.

15. light as lind] So in Annunciacio;

"A, what, I am light as lind!"
Towneley Myst. p. 80.

and in Chaucer's Clerk's Tale;

"Be aye of cheer as light as leaf on lind."
v. 9087. ed. Tyr.

Lind is the linden or lime-tree.

16. a versing box] Does it mean-a dice-box?

17. Sith I am nothing plain] the commencement of some song.

18. Heave and how rumbelow] A chorus of high antiquity, (sung
chiefly, it would seem, by sailors):

"They spread their sails as void of sorrow,
Forth they rowed, saint George to borrow,
For joy their trumpets did they blow,
And some sung heave and how rumbelow."
Cock Lorelles boat, sig. C 1.

"They rowed hard, and sung thereto,
With heavelow and rumbeloo."
Richard Coeur de Lion,-Weber's Met. Rom. ii. 99.

"Maidens of England sore may ye mourn
For your lemans ye have lost at Bannock's burn,
With heave a low.
What weeneth the king of England
So soon to have won Scotland,
With rumbelow."
Scottish Song on the Battle of Bannockburn,-Fabyan's Chron., vol.
fol.169. ed. 1559.

"Your mariners shall sing a-row
Hey how and rumby low."
The Squire of Low Degree,-Ritson's Met. Rom. iii. 179.

"I saw three ladies fair, singing hey and how,
Upon yon ley land, hey:
I saw three mariners, singing rumbelow,
Upon yon sea-strand, hey."
Song quoted ibid., iii. 353.

19. row the boat, Norman, row] A fragment of an old song, the
origin of which is thus recorded by Fabyan: "In this. xxxii. year
[of King Henry the Sixth] Jhon Norman foresaid, upon the morrow of
Simon and Jude's day, th'accustomed day when the new Mayor used
yearly to ride with great pomp unto Westminster to take his
charge, this Mayor first of all Mayors broke that ancient and old
continued custom, and was rowed thither by water, for the which ye
Watermen made of him a roundel or song to his great praise, the
which began: Row the boat, Norman, row to thy leman, and so forth
with a long process." Chron. vol. ii. fol. 457. ed. 1559.

20. Princess of youth can ye sing by rote?] The meaning of this
line seems to be-Can you sing by rote the song beginning, Princess
of youth? Skelton, in his Garland of Laurel, calls Lady Anne
Dakers

"Princess of youth, and flower of goodly port."
v. 897

21. Or shall I sail with you a fellowship assay] i.e., I suppose,-
Or try, of good fellowship, (or, perhaps, together with me,) the
song which commences Shall I sail with you?

"Now, of good fellowship, let me by thy dog."
Magnificence, v. 1095.

"Ing. But if thou wilt have a song that is good,
I have one of Robin Hood,
The best that ever was made.
Hu. Then a fellowship let us hear it."
Interlude of the iiii Elements, n. d. Sig. E vii.

22. bob me on the noll] i.e. beat me on the head.

23. But I require you no word that I say] i.e. But I beg you not
to mention a word of what I say.

24. evil payed] i.e. ill satisfied, ill pleased.

25. Dawes] Equivalent to-simpleton; the daw being reckoned a silly
bird: so again, in the next line but one, "doctor Dawcocke."

26. And so outface him with a card of ten] "A common phrase," says
Nares, "which we may suppose to have been derived from some game,
(possibly primero), wherein the standing boldly upon a ten was
often successful. A card of ten meant a tenth card, a ten . . . I
conceive the force of the phrase to have expressed originally the
confidence or impudence of one who with a ten, as at brag, faced,
or outfaced one who had really a faced card against him. To face
meant, as it still does, to bully, to attack by impudence of
face." Gloss. in v. Face it, &c. "The phrase of a card of ten was
possibly derived, by a jocular allusion, from that of a hart of
ten, in hunting, which meant a full grown deer, one past six years
of age." Ibid. in v. Card of ten.

27. such masters to play] i.e. to play such pranks of assumed
superiority. See Jamieson's Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang. in v.
Maistryss.

28. I am of countenance] i.e. perhaps, I am a person of' credit,
good means, consequence. (see Gifford's note on B. Jonson's Works,
ii. 111).

29. Riot] The picture of Riot in the present passage and in v. 379
sqq. gave birth no doubt to the following lines in a poem called
Sirs spare your good;

"No, by my faith, he said incontinent,
But by saint Thomas of Kent
I would have at the hazard a cast or two,
For to learn to caste the dice to and fro;
And if here be any body that will for money play,
I have yet in my purse money and pledges gay:
Some be nobles, some be crowns of France;
Have at all who will of this dance.
One of them answered with that word,
And cast a bale of dice on the board," &c.

I quote from Brit. Bibliog. ii. 371, where are extracts from an
ed. of the poem printed by Kytson, n. d.: it originally appeared
from the press of W. de Worde; see Cens. Liter. i. 55. sec. ed.

30. bones] i.e. dice.

31. Quater trey deuce] "Four three two" - a dice throw.

32. by saint Thomas of Kent] i.e. by Saint Thomas à Becket:

"Thought I, By saint Thomas of Kent," &c.
Chaucer's House of Fame,-Works, fol. 267. ed. 1602.

33. His hair was grown through out his hat] Compare Barclay's
Argument of the first Egloge;

"At divers holes his hair grew through his hood."
Sig. A i. ed. 1570.

and Heywood's Dialogue;

"There is a nest of chickens which he doth brood
That will sure make his hair grow through his hood."
Sig. G 2.,-Wordes, ed. 1598.

Ray gives, "His hair grows through his hood. He is very poor, his
hood is full of holes." Proverbs, p. 57. ed. 1768.

324 how he disguised was] i.e. what a wretched plight he was in:

"Ragged and torn, disguised in array."
Chaucer's Court of Love, fol. 329,-Works, ed. 1602.

35. he went so all for summer light] Compare;

"It seemed that he caried litle array,
All light for summer rode this worthy man."
Chaucer's Canon's Yoeman's Prol. v. 16035. ed. Tyr.

See too Bale's King Johan, p. 34. ed. Camd. Soc.; and our author's
Philip Sparrow, v. 719.

36. His hose was garded with a list of green] i.e. his breeches
were faced, trimmed with a border of green cloth, &c. "There was
an affectation of smartness in the trimming of his hose." Warton,
note on Hist. of E. P. ii. 348. ed. 4to.

37. Of Kirkby Kendal was his short demi] Kendal, or Kirkby in
Kendal, was early famous for the manufacture of cloth of various
colours, particularly green. Here the word "Kendal" seems
equivalent to-green: so too in Hall's Chronicle, where we are told
that Henry the Eighth, with a party of noblemen, "came suddenly in
a morning into the Queen's Chamber, all apparelled in short coats
of Kentish Kendal ... like outlaws, or Robyn Hood's men." (Henry
viii.) fol. vi. ed. 1548.-demi; i.e., says Warton, note on Hist.
of E. P. ii. 348. ed. 4to., "doublet, jacket:" rather, I believe,
some sort of close vest, his "coat" having been mentioned in the
preceding line.

38. In faith, deacon thou crew] The commencement of some song;
quoted again by our author in Epitaph for John Clarke and Adam
Udersall, v. 44. and in Why come ye not to Court, v. 63

39. he wore his gear so nigh] i.e., I suppose, he wore his clothes
so near, so thoroughly. But Warton explains it "his coat-sleeve
was so short." Note on Hist. of E. P. ii. 348. ed. 4to.

40. - his pouche,
The devil might dance therein for any crouch] -any crouch, i.e.
any piece of money,-many coins being marked with a cross on one
side. "The devil might dance in his purse without meeting with a
single sixpence." Warton, note on Hist. of E. P. ii. 348. ed. 4to.
So in Massinger's Bashful Lover;

"The devil sleeps in my pocket; I have no cross
To drive him from it."
Works (by Gifford), iv. 398. ed. 1813.

41. Counter he could O lux upon a pot]- i.e. he could sing O lux,
playing an accompaniment to his voice on a drinking pot. To
counter is properly-to sing an extemporaneous part upon the plain
chant. Skelton uses the word in other places, and perhaps not
always in its strict sense. O lux beata Trinitas ("O blessed light
of the Trinity") was an ancient hymn, "which," says Hawkins,
"seems to have been a very popular melody before the time of King
Henry viii," Hist. of Music, ii. 354. In a comedy by the Duke of
Newcastle is a somewhat similar passage: "I danced a Jig, while
Tom Brutish whistled and play'd upon the head of a pint pot." The
Humorous Lovers, 1677, act i. sc. 1. p. 5.

42. What, revel rout] Here, as below, "rout" is a verb-What, let
revel roar! Compare;

"And ever be merry, let revel rout."
A Morality,-Anc. Mysteries from the Digby MSS. p. 187. ed.
Abbotsf. Page 53. v. 370.

43. clicket] i.e. latch. "Cliquetus, pessulus versatilis;" French,
Loquet; from Clingere-clinch. See Ducange, in v. In Chaucer's
Merchant's Tale, v . 9991. ed. Tyr., "clicket" means a latch-key.

44. in the devil's date] An exclamation several times used by
Skelton.-In Piers Plowman, a charter, which is read at the
proposed marriage of Mode, is sealed "in the date of the devil,"
sig. C i. ed. 1561.

45. Pluck up thine heart upon a merry pin] The expression occurs
often in our early poetry; and is found even in one of Wycherley's
comedies.

46. And let us laugh a pluck or twain at nale] "Pluck" - compare
Thersytes, n. d.

"Darest thou try masteries with me a pluck."
p. 60. Rox. ed.

and a song quoted in Note 56 to Magnificence

"A stoup of beer up at a pluck."

at nale, (atten ale, at then ale; see Price's note, Warton's Hist.
of E. P. ii. 501. ed. 1824), i.e. at the ale house.

47. A bridling cast] Usually, a parting drink, "One for the road."
It occurs in Beaumont and Fletcher's Scornful Lady;

"Let's have a bridling cast before you go.
Fill's a new stoup."
act ii. sc. 2.

48. the dozen brown] Is used sometimes to signify thirteen; as in
a rare piece entitled A Brown Dozen of Drunkards, &c., 1648. 4to.,
who are thirteen in number. But in our text "the dozen brown"
seems merely to mean the full dozen: so in a tract (Letter from a
Spy at Oxford) cited by Grey in his notes on Hudibras, vol. ii.
375; "and this was the twelfth Conquest, which made up the
Conqueror's brown Dozen in Number, compared to the twelve Labours
of Hercules."

49. pass] Seems here to be equivalent to-stake; but I have not
found pass used with that meaning in any works on gaming. See The
Compleat Gamester, p. 119. ed. 1680.

50. agrise] For the readings in all the eds. "aryse" I have
ventured to substitute "agryse", cause to suffer. Compare;

"Sore might her agrise."
Arthur and Merlin, p. 34. ed. Abbotsf.

" Of his sweven sore him agrose."
Marie Maudelein, p. 226,-Turnbull's Legendae Catholicae (from the
Auchinleck MS.).

"The king's heart of pity gan agrise."
Chaucer's Man of Law's Tale, v. 5034. ed. Tyr.

"Such pains, that your hearts might agrise."
Chaucer's Friar's Tale, v. 7231. ed. Tyr.

51. Then in his hood &c.] This passage is quoted by Warton, who
observes, "There is also merit in the delineation of DISSIMULATION
. . . and it is not unlike Ariosto's manner in imagining these
allegorical personages." Hist. of E. P. ii. 349. ed. 4to.

52. to prove a daw] i.e. to prove, try a simpleton: see Note 25
above.-Warton, who gives the other reading, "to prey a daw,"
explains it-to catch a silly bird. Note on Hist. of E. P. ii. 349.
ed. 4to.

53. a stopping oyster] Compare Heywood;

"Herewithall his wife to make up my mouth,
Not only her husband's taunting tale avoweth,
But thereto deviseth to cast in my teeth
Checks and choking oysters."
Dialogue, sig. E,-Works, ed. 1598.

54. round] i.e. whisper,-or, rather, mutter, for Skelton (Garland
of Laurel, v. 250) and other poets make a distinction between
whisper and round:

"Me list not now whisper neither round."
Lydgate's Story of Thebes, Pars Prima, sig. b vii. ed. 4to. n. d.

"Whisper and round things imagined falsely."
Barclay's Ship of Fools, fol. 208. ed. 1570

"They're here with me already, whispering, rounding."
Shakespeare's Winter's Tale, act i. sc. 2.



PHILIP SPARROW
[From the ed. by Kele, n.d., collated with that by Kitson, n.d.
(which in some copies is said to be printed by Weale,) and with
Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568.]

HEREAFTER FOLLOWETH THE BOOK OF
PHILIP SPARROW
COMPILED BY MASTER SKELTON, POET LAUREATE
<1>

Placebo
Who is there, who?
Dilexi,<2>
Dame Margery;
Fa, re, my, my,
Wherefore and why, why?
For the soul of Philip Sparrow<3>
That was late slain at Carrow,<4>
Among the Nuns Black,<5>
For that sweet soul's sake,                                    10
And for all sparrows' souls
Set in our bead-rolls,
Pater noster qui,
With an Ave Mari,
And with the corner of a Creed,
The more shall be your meed.

When I remember again
How my Philip was slain,
Never half the pain
Was between you twain,
Pyramus and Thisbe,                                            20
As then befell to me:
I wept and I wailed,
The tears down hailed;<6>
But nothing it availed
To call Philip again,
Whom Gib our cat,<7> hath slain.

Gib, I say, our cat
Worried her on that
Which I loved best:                                            30
It cannot be express
My sorrowful heaviness,
But all without redress;
For within that stound,
Half slumbering, in a swound
I fell down to the ground.

Unneth I cast mine eyes
Toward the cloudy skies:
But when I did behold
My sparrow dead and cold,                                      40
No creature but that wold
Have rued upon me,
To behold and see
What heaviness did me pang:
Wherewith my hands I wrang,
That my sinews cracked,
As though I had been racked,
So pained and so strained
That no life well-nigh remained.

I sighed and I sobbed,                                         50
For that I was robbed
Of my sparrow's life.
O maiden, widow, and wife,
Of what estate ye be,
Of high or low degree,
Great sorrow then ye might see
And learn to weep at me!
Such pains did me fret
That mine heart did beat,
My visage pale and dead,                                       60
Wan, and blue as lead;
The pangs of hateful death
Well-nigh had stopped my breath.

Heu, heu, me,
That I am woe for thee!
Dominum, cum tribularer, clamavi.<8>
Of God nothing else crave I
But Philip's soul to keep
From the marees deep
Of Acherontes'<9> well,                                        70
That is a flood of hell;
And from the great Pluto,
The prince of endless woe;
And from foul Alecto,
With visage black and blo;
And from Medusa, that mare,
That like a fiend doth stare;
And from Megaera's adders
For ruffling of Philip's feathers,
And from her fiery sparklings                                  80
For burning of his wings;
And from the smokes sour
Of Proserpina's bower;
And from the dens dark
Where Cerberus doth bark,
Whom Theseus did affray,
Whom Hercules did outray,<10>
As famous poets say;
From that hell-hound
That lieth in chains bound,                                    90
With ghastly heads three;
To Jupiter pray we
That Philip preserved may be!
Amen, say ye with me!

Dominus,
Help now, sweet Jesus!
Levavi oculos meos in montes.<11>
Would God I had Zenophontes,<12>
Or Socrates the wise,
To show me their device                                       100
Moderately to take
This sorrow that I make
For Philip Sparrow's sake!
So fervently I shake,
I feel my body quake;
So urgently I am brought
Into careful thought.
Like Andromach, Hector's wife,
Was weary of her life,
When she had lost her joy,                                    110
Noble Hector of Troy;
In like manner also
Increaseth my deadly woe,
For my sparrow is go.

It was so pretty a fool,
It would sit on a stool,
And learned after my school
For to keep his cut,
With Philip, keep your cut!<13>

It had a velvet cap,                                          120
And would sit upon my lap,
And seek after small worms,
And sometime white bread-crumbs;
And many times and oft
Between my breasts soft<14>
It would lie and rest;
It was proper and prest.

Sometime he would gasp
When he saw a wasp;
A fly or a gnat,                                              130
He would fly at that;
And prettily he would pant
When he saw an ant.
Lord, how he would pry
After the butterfly!
Lord, how he would hop
After the gressop!
And when I said, Phip, Phip!
Then he would leap and skip,
And take me, by the lip.                                      140
Alas, it will me slo
That Philip is gone me fro!

Sin iniquitates<15>
Alas, I was evil at ease!
De profundis clamavi,<16>
When I saw my sparrow die!

Now, after my dome,
Dame Sulpicia<17> at Rome,
Whose name registered was
For ever in tables of brass,                                  150
Because that she did pass
In poesy to indite
And eloquently to write,
Though she would pretend
My sparrow to commend,
I trow she could not amend
Reporting the virtues all
Of my sparrow royal.

For it would come and go,
And fly so to and fro;                                        160
And on me it would leap
When I was asleep,
And his feathers shake,
Wherewith he would make
Me often for to wake,
And for to take him in
Upon my naked skin;
God wot, we thought no sin:
What though he crept so low?
It was no hurt, I trow                                        170
He did nothing, pardie,
But sit upon my knee:
Philip, though he were nice,
In him it was no vice;
Philip had leave to go
To peck my little toe;
Philip might be bold
And do what he wold;
Philip would seek and take
All the fleas black                                           180
That he could there espy
With his wanton eye.

Opera.
La, sol, fa, fa,
Confitebor tibi, Domine, in toto corde meo!<18>
Alas, I would ride and go<19>
A thousand mile of ground!
If any such might be found
It were worth an hundred pound
Of King Croesus' gold,                                        190
Or of Attalus the old,
The rich prince of Pergame,<20>
Whoso list the story to see.
Cadmus, that his sister sought,
An he should be bought
For gold and fee,
He should over the sea,
To weet if he could bring
Any of the offspring,
Or any of the blood.                                          200
But whoso understood
Of Medea's art,
I would I had a part
Of her crafty magic!
My sparrow then should be quick
With a charm or twain,
And play with me again.
But all this is in vain
Thus for to complain.

I took my sampler once                                        210
Of purpose, for the nonce,
To sew with stitches of silk
My sparrow white as milk,<21>
That by representation
Of his image and fashion
To me it might impart
Some pleasure and comfort
For my solace and sport:
But when I was sewing his beak,
Methought my sparrow did speak,                               220
And opened his pretty bill,
Saying, Maid, ye are in will
Again me for to kill,
Ye prick me in the head!
With that my needle waxed red,
Methought, of Philip's blood;
Mine hair right upstood,
I was in such a fray,
My speech was taken away.
I cast down that there was,                                   230
And said, Alas, alas,
How cometh this to pass?
My fingers, dead and cold,
Could not my sampler hold:
My needle and thread 
I threw away for dread.
The best now that I may
Is for his soul to pray:
A porta inferi,<22>
Good Lord, have mercy                                         240
Upon my sparrow's soul,
Written in my bead-roll!

Audivi vocem,<23>
Japhet, Ham, and Shem,
Magnificat,<24>
Show me the right path
To the hills of Armony,<25>
Wherefore the birds yet cry<26>
Of your father's boat,
That was sometime afloat,                                     250
And now they lie and rot;
Let some poets write
Deucalion's flood it hight.
But as verily as ye be
The natural sonnes three
Of Noah the patriarch,
That made that great ark,
Wherein he had apes and owls,
Beasts, birds, and fowls,
That if ye can find                                           260
Any of my sparrow's kind
God send the soul good rest!
I would have yet a nest
As pretty and as prest
As my sparrow was.
But my sparrow did pass
All sparrows of the wood
That were since Noah's flood,
Was never none so good.
King Philip of Macedony                                       270
Had no such Philip as I,
No, no, sir, hardly.

That vengeance I ask and cry,
By way of exclamation,
On all the whole nation
Of cats wild and tame;
God send them sorrow and shame!
That cat specially
That slew so cruelly
My little pretty sparrow                                      280
That I brought up at Carrow.

O cat of carlish kind,
The fiend was in thy mind
When thou my bird untwined!<27>
I would thou hadst been blind!
The leopards savage,
The lions in their rage
Might catch thee in their paws,
And gnaw thee in their jaws!
The serpents of Libany<28>                                    290
Might sting thee venomously!
The dragons with their tongues
Might poison thy liver and lungs!
The manticores<29> of the mountains
Might feed them on thy brains!

Melanchates,<30> that hound
That plucked Actaeon to the ground,
Gave him his mortal wound,
Changed to a deer, 
The story doth appear,                                        300
Was changed to an hart:
So thou, foul cat that thou art,
The selfsame hound
Might thee confound,
That his own lord bote,<31>
Might bite asunder thy throat!

Of Ind the greedy gripes
Might tear out all thy tripes!
Of Arcady the bears
Might pluck away thine ears!                                  310
The wild wolf Lycaon<32>
Bite asunder thy backbone!
Of Etna the burning hill,
That day and night burneth still,
Set in thy tail a blaze,
That all the world may gaze
And wonder upon thee,
From Ocean the great sea
Unto the Isles of Orcady,
From Tilbury Ferry                                            320
To the plain of Salisbury!
So traitorously my bird to kill
That never ought thee evil will!

Was never bird in cage
More gentle of courage
In doing his homage 
Unto his sovereign.
Alas, I say again,
Death hath departed us twain!
The false cat hath thee slain:                                330
Farewell, Philip, adieu!
Our Lord, thy soul rescue!
Farewell, without restore,
Farewell, for evermore!

An it were a Jew,
It would make one rue,
To see my sorrow new.
These villainous false cats
Were made for mice and rats,
And not for birds small.                                      340
Alas, my face waxeth pale,
Telling this piteous tale,
How my bird so fair,
That was wont to repair,
And go in at my spare,
And creep in at my gore
Of my gown before,<33>
Flickering with his wings!
Alas, my heart it stings,
Remembering pretty things!                                    350
Alas, mine heart it slayeth
My Philip's doleful death!
When I remember it,
How prettily it would sit,
Many times and oft,
Upon my finger aloft!
I played with him tittle-tattle,
And fed him with my spittle,
With his bill between my lips;
It was my pretty Phips!                                       360
Many a pretty kiss
Had I of his sweet muss;
And now the cause is thus,
That he is slain me fro,
To my great pain and woe.

Of fortune this the chance
Standeth on variance:
Oft time after pleasance,
Trouble and grievance;
No man can be sure                                            370
Alway to have pleasure:
As well perceive ye may
How my disport and play
From me was taken away
By Gib, our cat savage,
That in a furious rage
Caught Philip by the head
And slew him there stark dead!

Kyrie, eleison,
Christe, eleison,                                             380
Kyrie, eleison!<34>
For Philip Sparrow's soul,
Set in our bead-roll,
Let us now whisper
A Pater noster.

Lauda anima mea, Dominum!<35>
To weep with me look that ye come,
All manner of birds in your kind;<36>
See none be left behind.
To mourning look that ye fall                                 390
With dolorous songs funeral,
Some to sing, and some to say,
Some to weep, and some to pray,
Every birde in his lay.
The goldfinch, the wagtail;
The jangling<37> jay to rail,
The flecked pie to chatter
Of this dolorous matter;
And robin redbreast,
He shall be the priest                                        400
The requiem mass to sing,
Softly warbling,
With help of the reed sparrow,
And the chattering swallow,
This hearse for to hallow;
The lark with his long toe;
The spink, and the martinet also;
The shoveller with his broad beak;
The dotterel<38>, that foolish peak,
And also the mad coot,                                        410
With bald face to toot;
The fieldfare and the snite;
The crow and the kite;
The raven, called Rolfe,
His plain-song to sol-fa;
The partridge, the quail;
The plover with us to wail;
The woodhack, that singeth chur
Hoarsely, as he had the mur;
The lusty chanting nightingale;                               420
The popinjay to tell her tale,
That tooteh oft in a glass,
Shall read the Gospel at mass;
The mavis with her whistle
Shall read there the Epistle.
But with a large and a long
To keep just plain-song,
Our chanters shall be the cuckoo,<39>
The culver, the stockdoo.
With peewit the lapwing,<40>                                  430
The Versicles shall sing.

The bittern with his bump,<41>
The crane with his trump,
The swan of Menander,<42>
The goose and the gander,
The duck and the drake,
Shall watch at this wake;<43>
The peacock so proud,
Because his voice is loud,
And hath a glorious tail,                                     440
He shall sing the grail;
The owl, that is so foul,<44>
Must help us to howl;
The heron so gaunt,
And the cormorant,
With the pheasant,
And the gaggling gant,<45>
And the churlish chough;
The knot and the ruff;
The barnacle,<46> the buzzard,                                450
With the wild mallard;
The divendop to sleep;
The water-hen to weep;
The puffin and the teal
Money they shall deal<47>
To poor folk at large,
That shall be their charge;
The seamew and the titmouse;
The woodcock with the long nose;
The throstle with her warbling;                               460
The starling with her brabbling;<48>
The rook, with the osprey
That putteth fishes to a fray;<49>
And the dainty curlew,
With the turtle most true.

At this Placebo
We may not well forgo
The countering of the co:
The stork also,
That maketh his nest                                          470
In chimneys to rest;
Within those walls
No broken galls
May there abide
Of cuckoldry side,<50>
Or else philosophy
Maketh a great lie.

The ostrich, that will eat
An horseshoe so great,<51>
In the stead of meat,                                         480
Such fervent heat
His stomach doth fret;
He cannot well fly,
Nor sing tunably,
Yet at a braid<52>
He hath well assayed
To sol-fa above E-la.<53>
Ga, lorell, fa, fa;
Ne quando                                                     490
Male cantando,<54>
The best that we can,
To make him our bell-man,
And let him ring the bells;
He can do nothing else.<55>

Chanticleer, our cock,
Must tell what is of the clock
By the astrology
That he hath naturally<56>
Conceived and caught,
And was never taught                                          500
By Albumasar<57>
The astronomer,
Nor by Ptolomy
Prince of astronomy,
Nor yet by Haly;<58>
And yet he croweth daily
And nightly the tides
That no man abides,
With Partlot his hen,<59>
Whom now and then                                             510
He plucketh by the head
When he doth her tread.

The bird of Araby,
That potentially
May never die,
And yet there is none
But one alone;
A phoenix it is
This hearse that must bless
With aromatic gums                                            520
That cost great sums,
The way of thurification
To make a fumigation,
Sweet of reflair,
And redolent of air,
This corse for to cense
With great reverence,
As patriarch or pope
In a black cope.
Whiles he censeth the hearse,                                 530
He shall sing the verse,
Libera me,<60>
In de, la, sol, re,
Softly B molle<61>
For my sparrow's soul.
Pliny showeth all
In his Story Natural<62>
What he doth find
Of the phoenix kind;
Of whose incineration                                         540
There riseth a new creation
Of the same fashion
Without alteration,
Saving that old age
Is turned into courage
Of fresh youth again;
This matter true and plain,
Plain matter indeed,
Who so list to read.

But for the eagle doth fly                                    550
Highest in the sky,
He shall be the sedean,<63>
The choir to demean,
As provost principal,
To teach them their Ordinal;
Also the noble falcon,<64>
With the gyrfalcon,<65>
The tiercel gentle,<66>
They shall mourn soft and still
In their amice<67> of gray;                                   560
The saker<68> with them shall say
Dirige for Philip's soul;
The goshawk shall have a role
The choristers to control;
The lanners and the merlins<69>
Shall stand in their mourning-gowns;
The hobby<70> and the musket<71>
The censers and the cross shall fet;
The kestrel<72> in all this work
Shall be holy water clerk.<73>                                570

And now the dark cloudy night
Chaseth away Phoebus bright,
Taking his course toward the west,
God send my sparrow's soul good rest!
Requiem aeternum dona eis, Domine!<74>
Fa, fa, fa, mi, re, re,
A por ta in fe ri,
Fa, fa, fa, mi, mi.
Credo videre bona Domini,<75>

I pray God, Philip to heaven may fly!                         580
Domine, exaudi orationem meam!<76>
To heaven he shall, from heaven he came!
Do mi nus vo bis cum!
Of all good prayers God send him some!

Oremus,
Deus, cui proprium est misereri et parcere,<77>
On Philip's soul have pity!
For he was a pretty cock,
And came of a gentle stock,
And wrapt in a maiden's smock,<78>                            590
And cherished full daintily,
Till cruel fate made him to die:
Alas, for doleful destiny!
But whereto should I
Longer mourn or cry?
To Jupiter I call,
Of heaven imperial,
That Philip may fly
Above the starry sky,
To tread the pretty wren,                                     600
That is our Lady's hen:<79>
Amen, amen, amen!

Yet one thing is behind,
That now cometh to mind;
An epitaph I would have
For Philip's grave:
But for I am a maid,
Timorous, half afraid,
That never yet assayed
Of Helicon's well,                                            610
Where the Muses dwell;
Though I can read and spell,
Recount, report, and tell
Of the Tales of Canterbury,
Some sad stories, some merry;
As Palamon and Arcet,
Duke Theseus, and Partelet;
And of the Wife of Bath,
That worketh much scath
When her tale is told                                         620
Among housewives bold,
How she controlled
Her husbands as she wold,
And them to despise
In the homeliest wise,
Bring other wives in thought
Their husbands to set at nought.
And though that read have I
Of Gawain<80> and Sir Guy,<81>
And tell can a great piece                                    630
Of the Golden Fleece,
How Jason it won,<82>
Like a valiant man;
Of Arthur's Round Table,
With his knights commendable,
And Dame Gaynour, his queen,
Was somewhat wanton, I ween;
How Sir Lancelot de Lake
Many a spear brake
For his lady's sake;                                          640
Of Tristram, and King Mark,
And all the whole work
Of Belle Isolde his wife,
For whom was much strife;<83>
Some say she was light,
And made her husband knight
Of the common hall,
That cuckolds men call;
And of Sir Lybius,<84>
Named Dysconius;                                              650
Of Quater Fylz Amund,
And how they were summoned
To Rome, to Charlemagne,
Upon a great pain,
And how they rode each one
On Bayard Mountalbon;
Men see him now and then
In the forest of Arden:<85>
What though I can frame
The stories by name                                           660
Of Judas Maccabeus,<86>
And of Caesar Julius;<87>
And of the love between
Paris and Vienne;<88>
And of the duke Hannibal,<89>
That made the Romans all
Fordread and to quake:
How Scipion did wake
The city of Carthage,
Which by his unmerciful rage                                  670
He beat down to the ground.
And though I can expound
Of Hector of Troy,
That was all their joy,<90>
Whom Achilles slew,
Wherefore all Troy did rue;
And of the love so hot
That made Troilus to dote
Upon fair Cresseid,<91>
And what they wrote and said,                                 680
And of their wanton wills
Pandar bore the bills
From one to the other;
His master's love to further,
Sometime a precious thing,
An ouch,<65> or else a ring;
From her to him again
Sometime a pretty chain,
Or a bracelet of her hair,
Prayed Troilus for to wear                                    690
That token for her sake;
How heartily he did it take,
And much thereof did make;
And all that was in vain,
For she did but feign;
The story telleth plain,
He could not obtain,
Though his father were a king,
Yet there was a thing
That made the male to wring;<93>                              700
She made him to sing
The song of lover's lay;
Musing night and day,
Mourning all alone,
Comfort had he none,
For she was quite gone;
Thus in conclusion,
She brought him in abusion;
In earnest and in game
She was much to blame;                                        710
Disparaged is her fame,
And blemished is her name,
In manner half with shame;
Troilus also hath lost
On her much love and cost,
And now must kiss the post;<94>
Pandar, that went between,
Hath won nothing, I ween,
But light for summer green;
Yet for a special laud                                        720
He is named Troilus' bawd;
Of that name he is sure
Whiles the world shall dure:

Though I remember the fable
Of Penelope most stable,
To her husband most true,
Yet long-time she ne knew
Whether he were live or dead;
Her wit stood her in stead,
That she was true and just                                    730
For any bodily lust
To Ulysses her make,
And never would him forsake:

Of Marcus Marcellus
A process I could tell us;
And of Antiochus,<95>
And of Josephus
De Antiquitatibus;<96>
And of Mardocheus,
And of great Ahasuerus,<97>                                   740
And of Vesca<98> his queen,
Whom he forsook with teen,
And of Esther his other wife,
With whom he led a pleasant life;
Of King Alexander;<99>
And of King Evander;<100>
And of Porsena the great,
That made the Romans to sweat.:
Though I have enrolled
A thousand new and old                                        750
Of these historious tales,
To fill budgets and males
With books that I have read,
Yet I am nothing sped,
And can but little skill
Of Ovid or Virgil,
Or of Plutarch,
Or Francis Petrarch,
Alcaeus or Sappho,
Or such others poets mo,                                      760
As Linus and Homerus,
Euphorion and Theocritus,
Anacreon and Anion,
Sophocles and Philemon,
Pindarus and Simonides,
Philistion and Pherecydes;
These poets of ancientry,
They are too diffuse for me:<101>

For, as I tofore have said,
I am but a young maid,                                        770
And cannot in effect
My style as yet direct
With English words elect:
Our natural tongue is rude,
And hard to be ennewed<102>
With polished terms lusty;
Our language is so rusty,
So cankered, and so full
Of frowards, and so dull,
That if I would apply                                         780
To write ornately,
I wot not where to find
Terms to serve my mind.

Gower's English is old,
And of no value told;
His matter is worth gold,
And worthy to be enrolled.

In Chaucer I am sped,
His Tales I have read:
His matter is delectable,                                     790
Solacious, and commendable;
His English well allowed,
So as it is enprowed,
For as it is employed,
There is no English void,
At those days much commended;
And now men would have amended
His English, whereat they bark,
And mar all they work.
Chaucer, that famous clerk,                                   800
His terms were not dark,
But pleasant, easy, and plain;
No word he wrote in vain.

Also John Lydgate
Writeth after an higher rate;<103>
It is diffuse to find
The sentence of his mind,
Yet writeth he in his kind,
No man that can amend<104>
Those matters that he hath penned;                            810
Yet some men find a fault,
And say he writeth too haute.

Wherefore hold me excused
If I have not well perused
Mine English half abused;
Though it be refused,
In worth<105> I shall it take,
And fewer words make.
But, for my sparrow's sake,

Yet as a woman may,                                           820
My wit I shall assay
An epitaph to write
In Latin plain and light,
Whereof the elegy
Followeth by and by:

Flos volucrum formose, vale!
Philippe, sub isto
Marmore iam recubas,
Qui mihi carus eras.
Semper erunt nitido                                           830
Radiantia sidera coelo;
Impressusque meo
Pectore semper eris.<106>

Per me laurigerum
Britonum Skeltonida vatem
Haec cecinisse licet
Ficta sub imagine texta.
Cujus eras volucris,
Praestanti corpore virgo:
Candida Nais erat,                                            840
Formosior ista Joanna est;
Docta Corinna fuit,
Sed magis ista sapit.
Bien m'en souvient.<107>

THE COMMENDATIONS

Beati immaculati in via,
O gloriosa femina!<108>
Now mine whole imagination
And studious meditation
Is to take this commendation
In this consideration;                                        850
And under patient toleration
Of that most goodly maid
That Placebo hath said,
And for her sparrow prayed
In lamentable wise,
Now will I enterprise,
Thorough the grace divine
Of the Muses nine,
Her beauty to commend,
If Arethusa will send<109>                                    860
Me influence to indite,
And with my pen to write;
If Apollo will promise,
Melodiously it to devise,
His tunable harp strings
With harmony that sings
Of princes and of kings
And of all pleasant things,
Of lust and of delight,
Through his godly might;                                      870
To whom be the laud ascribed
That my pen hath imbibed
With the aureate drops,
As verily my hope is,
Of Tagus, that golden flood,
That passeth all earthly good;
And as that flood doth pass
All floods that ever was
With his golden sands,
Whoso that understands                                        880
Cosmography, and the streames
And the floods in strange reams,
Right so she doth exceed
All other of whom we read,
Whose fame by me shall spread
Into Persia and Mede,
From Britons' Albion
To the Tower of Babylon.

I trust it is no shame,
And no man will me blame,                                     890
Though I register her name
In the court of Fame;
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
So Jupiter me succour,
She flourisheth new and new<110>
In beauty and virtue;
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina,<111>
Retribue servo tuo, vivifica me!                              900
Labia mea laudabunt te.<112>

But enforced am I
Openly to ascry,
And to make an outcry
Against odious Envy,<113>
That evermore will lie,
And say cursedly;
With his leather eye,
And cheeks dry;
With visage wan,                                              910
As swart as tan;
His bones creak,
Lean as a rake;<80>
His gums rusty
Are full unlusty;
His heart withal
Bitter as gall;
His liver, his lung
With anger is wrung;
His serpent's tongue
That many one hath stung;                                     920
He frowneth ever;
He laugheth never,
Even nor morrow,
But other men's sorrow
Causeth him to grin
And rejoice therein;
No sleep can him catch,
But ever doth watch,
He is so beat                                                 930
With malice, and fret
With anger and ire,
His foul desire
Will suffer no sleep
In his head to creep;
His foul semblant
All displeasant;
When others are glad,
Then is he sad;
Frantic and mad;                                              940
His tongue never still
For to say ill,
Writhing and wringing,
Biting and stinging;
And thus this elf
Consumeth himself,
Himself doth slo
With pain and woe.
This false Envy
Sayeth that I                                                 950
Use great folly
For to indite,
And for to write,
And spend my time
In prose and rhyme,
For to express
The nobleness
Of my mistress,
That causeth me
Studious to be                                                960
To make a relation,
Of her commendation.
And there again
Envy doth complain,
And hath disdain; 
But yet certain
I will be plain,
And my style dress
To this process.

Now Phoebus me ken                                            970
To sharp my pen,
And lead my fist
As him best list,
That I may say
Honour alway
Of womankind!
Truth doth me bind
And loyalty
Ever to be
Their true bedell,                                            980
To write and tell
How women excel
In nobleness;
As my mistress,
Of whom I think
With pen and ink
For to compile
Some goodly style;
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,                                 990
So Jupiter me succour,
She flourisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue:
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina,<111>
Legem pone mihi, domina, viam justificationum tuarum!
Quemadmodum desiderat cervus ad fontes aquarum.<115>

How shall I report
All the goodly sort
Of her features clear,                                       1000
That hath none earthly peer?
Her favour of her face
Ennewed all with grace,
Comfort, pleasure, and solace.
Mine heart doth so embrace,
And so hath ravished me
Her to behold and see,
That in words plain
I cannot me refrain
To look on her again:                                        1010
Alas, what should I feign?
It were a pleasant pain
With her aye to remain.

Her eyen grey and steep
Causeth mine heart to leap;
With her brows bent<116>
She may well represent
Fair Lucres, as I ween,
Or else fair Polexene,<117>
Or else Calliope,
Or else Penelope;
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
So Jupiter me succour,
She flourisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue:
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina,<111>
Memor esto verbi tui servo tuo!
Servus tuus sum ego.<118>                                    1020

The Indy sapphire blue
Her veins doth ennew;
The orient pearl so clear,
The whiteness of her lere;
Her lusty ruby rudds
Resemble the rose buds;
Her lips soft and merry
Enbloomed like the cherry,
It were an heavenly bliss
Her sugared mouth to kiss.                                   1040

Her beauty to augment,
Dame Nature hath her lent
A wart upon her cheek,
Whoso list to seek
In her visage a scar,
That seemeth from afar
Like to the radiant star,
All with favour fret,<119>
So properly it is set:
She is the violet,                                           1050
The daisy delectable,
The columbine commendable,
The jelofer amiable;<120>
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
So Jupiter me succour,
She flourisheth new and new
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina,<111>                                      1060
Bonitatem fecisti cum servo tuo, domina,
Et ex praecordiis sonant praeconia!<121>

And when I perceived
Her wart and conceived,
It cannot be denied
But it was well conveyed,
And set so womanly,
And nothing wantonly,
But right conveniently,
And full congruently,                                        1070
As Nature could devise,
In most goodly wise;
Whoso list behold,
It maketh lovers bold
To her to sue for grace,
Her favour to purchase;
The scar<122> upon her chin,
Enhatched<123> on her fair skin,
Whiter than the swan,
It would make any man                                        1080
To forget deadly sin<124>
Her favour to win;
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
So Jupiter me succour,
She flourisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue:
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina,<111>
Defecit in salutatione tua anima mea;                        1090
Quid petis filio, mater dulcissima? babae!<125>

Soft, and make no din,
For now I will begin
To have in remembrance
Her goodly dalliance,
And her goodly pastance:
So sad and so demure,
Behaving her so sure,
With words of pleasure
She would make to the lure<126>                              1100
And any man convert
To give her his whole heart.
She made me sore amazed
Upon her when I gazed,
Methought mine heart was crazed,
My eyen were so dazed;
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
So Jupiter me succour,
She flourisheth new and new                                  1110
In beauty and virtue:
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina,<111>
Quomodo dilexi legem tuam, domina!
Recedant vetera, nova sint omnia.<127>

And to amend her tale,
When she list to avail,<128>
And with her fingers small,
And hands soft as silk,
Whiter than the milk,                                        1120
That are so quickly veined,<129>
Wherewith my hand she strained,
Lord, how I was pained!
Unneth I me refrained,
How she me had reclaimed,<130>
And me to her retained,
Embracing therewithall
Her goodly middle small
With sides long and strait:
To tell you what conceit                                     1130
I had then in a trice,
The matter were too nice,
And yet there was no vice,
Nor yet no villany,
But only fantasy;
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
She flourisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue:                                        1140
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina,<111>
Iniquos odio habui!
Non calumnientur me superbi.<131>

But whereto should I note
How often did I toot
Upon her pretty foot?
It rased mine heart-root
To see her tread the ground
With heels short and round.                                  1150
She is plainly express
Egeria, the goddess,
And like to her image,
Emportured with courage,
A lover's pilgrimage;<132>
There is no beast savage,
Ne no tiger so wood,
But she would change his mood,
Such relucent grace
Is formed in her face;                                       1160
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
So Jupiter me succour,
She flourisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue:
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina,<111>
Mirabilia testimonia tua!
Sicut novellae plantationes in juventute sua.<133>

So goodly as she dresses,                                    1170
So properly she presses
The bright golden tresses
Of her hair so fine,
Like Phoebus' beams shine.
Whereto should I disclose
The gartering of her hose?<134>
It is for to suppose
How that she can wear
Gorgeously her gear;
Her fresh habiliments                                        1180
With other implements
To serve for all intents,
Like Dame Flora, queen
Of lusty summer green;
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
So Jupiter me succour,
She flourisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue:
Hac claritate gemina,                                        1190
O gloriosa femina,<111>
Clamavi in toto corde, exaudi me!
Misericordia tua magna est super me.<135>

Her kirtle<136> so goodly laced,
And under that is braced
Such pleasures that I may
Neither write nor say;
Yet though I write with ink,
No man can let me think,
For thought hath liberty,                                    1200
Thought is frank and free;
To think a merry thought
It cost me little nor naught.
Would God mine homely style
Were polished with the file
Of Cicero's eloquence,
To praise her excellence!
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
So Jupiter me succour,                                       1210
She flourisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue:
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina,<111>
Principes persecuti sunt me gratis!
Omnibus consideratis,
Paradisus voluptatis
Haec virgo est dulcissima.<137>

My pen it is unable,
My hand it is unstable,                                      1220
My reason rude and dull
To praise her at the full;
Goodly Mistress Jane,
Sober, demure Diane;
Jane this mistress hight,
The lode-star of delight,
Dame Venus of all pleasure,
The well of worldly treasure;
She doth exceed and pass
In prudence Dame Pallas;                                     1230
For this most goodly flower,
This blossom of fresh colour,
So Jupiter me succour,
She flourisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue:
Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina!<111>

Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine!<74>
With this psalm, Domine, probasti me,<138>
Shall sail over the sea,                                     1240
With Tibi, Domine, commendamus,<139>
On pilgrimage to Saint James,
For shrimps, and for prawns,
And for stalking cranes;
And where my pen hath offended, 
I pray you it may be amended
By discreet consideration
Of your wise reformation;
I have not offended, I trust,
If it be sadly discussed.                                    1250
It were no gentle guise
This treatise to despise
Because I have written and said
Honour of this fair maid;
Wherefore should I be blamed,
That I Jane have named,
And famously proclaimed?
She is worthy to be enrolled
With letters of gold.
Car elle vaut.<140>                                          1260

Per me laurigerum Britonum Skeltonida vatem.<141>

Laudibus eximiis merito haec redimita puella est:
Formosam cecini, qua non formosior nulla est; 
Formosam potius quam commendaret Homerus.
Sic juvat interdum rigidos recreare labores,
Nec minus hoc titulo tersa .Minerva mea est.
Rien que plaisir.<142>

Thus endeth the Book of Philip Sparrow, and here followeth an
addition made by Master Skelton.

<143>

The guise nowadays
Of some jangling jays
Is to discommend                                             1270
That they cannot amend,
Though they would spend
All the wits they have.

What ails them to deprave<144>
Philip Sparrow's grave?
His Dirige, her Commendation
Can be no derogation,
But mirth and consolation
Made by protestation,
No man to miscontent                                         1280
With Philip's interment.

Alas, that goodly maid,
Why should she be afraid?
Why should she take shame
That her goodly name,
Honourably reported,
Should be set and sorted,
To be matriculate
With ladies of estate?

I conjure thee, Philip Sparrow,                              1290
By Hercules that hell did harrow,<145>
And with a venomous arrow
Slew of the Epidaures<146>
One of the Centaures,
Or Onocentaures,<147>
Or Hippocentaures;<148>
By whose might and main
An hart was slain
With horns twain
Of glittering gold;                                          1300
And the apples of gold
Of Hesperides withhold,
And with a dragon kept
That nevermore slept,
By martial strength
He won at length;
And slew Geryon
With three bodies in one;
With mighty courage
Adaunted the rage                                            1310
Of a lion savage;
Of Diomedes' stable
He brought out a rabble
Of coursers and rounces
With leaps and bounces;
And with mighty lugging,
Wrestling and tugging,
He plucked the bull
By the horned skull,
And offered to Cornucopia;<149>                              1320
And so forth per cetera.

Also by Hecate's bower,
In Pluto's ghastly tower;

By the ugly Eumenides,
That never have rest nor ease;

By the venomous serpent,
That in hell is never brent,<150>
In Lerna the Greek's fen,
That was engendered then;

By Chimera's flames,
And all the deadly names
Of infernal posty,
Where souls fry and roasty;

By the Stygian flood,
And the streams wood
Of Cocytus' bottomless well;

By the ferryman of hell,
Charon with his beard hoar,
That roweth with a rude oar
And with his frownsed foretop                                1340
Guideth his boat with a prop:

I conjure Philip, and call
In the same of King Saul;
Primo Regum<151> express,
He bade the Pythoness<152>
To witchcraft her to dress,
And by her abusions
And damnable illusions
Of marvellous conclusions,
And by her superstitions,                                    1350
And wonderful conditions,<153>
She raised up in that stead
Samuel that was dead;
But whether it were so,
He were idem in numero,<154>
The self-same Samuel,
Howbeit to Saul he did tell
The Philistines should him ascry,<155>
And the next day he should die,
I will myself discharge                                      1360
To lettered men at large:

But, Philip, I conjure thee
Now by these names three,
Diana in the woods green,
Luna that so bright doth shine,
Proserpina in hell,
That thou shortly tell,
And show now unto me
What the cause may be
Of this perplexity!                                          1370

Inferias, Philippe, tuas Scroupe pulchra Joanna
Instanter petiit: cur nostri carminis illam
Nunc pudet? est sero; minor est infamia vero.<156>

Then such as have disdained 
And of this work complained,
I pray God they be pained
No worse than is contained
In verses two or three
That follow as ye may see.

Luride, cur, livor, volucris pia funera damnas?              1380
Talia te rapiant rapiunt quae fata volucrem!
Est tamen invidia mors tibi continua.<157>



NOTES TO PHILIP SPARROW

1. PHILIP SPARROW must have been written before the end of 1508;
for it is mentioned with contempt in the concluding lines of
Barclay's Ship of Fools, which was finished in that year: see Some
Account of Skelton and his Writings.

The Luctus in morte Passeris of Catullus no doubt suggested the
present production to Skelton, who, when he calls on "all manner
of birds" (v. 387) to join in lamenting Philip Sparrow, seems also
to have had an eye to Ovid's elegy In mortem Psittaci, Amor. ii.
6. Another piece of the kind is extant among the compositions of
antiquity,-the Psittacus Atedii Melioris of Statius, Silv. ii. 4.
In the Amphitheatrum Sapientiae Socraticae Joco-seriae, &c., of
Dornavius, i. 460 sqq. may be found various Latin poems on the
deaths, &c. of sparrows by writers posterior to the time of
Skelton. See too Herrick's lines Upon the death of his Sparrow, an
Elegy, Hesperides, 1648. p. 117; and the verses entitled Phyllis
on the death of her Sparrow, attributed to Drummond, Works, 1711.
p. 50. "Old Skelton's 'Philip Sparrow,' an exquisite and original
poem." Coleridge's Remains, ii. 163. Page 61.

2. Placebo, 
. . . . 
Dilexi] "I will please . . . . I am well pleased". These, and many
other Latin phrases in the poem, are taken from the Service for
the Dead. See Glen Gunnhouse's Hypertext Book of Hours at
http://www.medievalist.net/hourstxt/deadves.htm. Skelton is not
the only writer that has taken liberties with the Catholic
liturgy. In Chaucer's Court of Love, parts of it are sung by
various birds; Domine, labia by the nightingale, Venite by the
eagle, &c., Works, fol. 333. ed. 1602: in a short poem by Lydgate
"diverse fowls" are introduced singing different hymns. MS. Harl.
2251. fol. 37: and see too a poem (attributed, without any
authority, to Skelton) called Harmony of Birds, n. d., reprinted
(inaccurately) in Typog. Antiq. iv. 380. ed. Dibdin; and Sir D.
Lyndsay's Complaint of the Papingo, Works, i. 325. ed. Chalmers.
In Reynard the Fox, we are told that at the burial of "coppe,
chantecleer's daughter,"-"Then began they placebo domino, with the
verses that belongen," &c. Sig. a 8. ed. 1481. Compare also the
mock Requiem printed (somewhat incorrectly) from MS. Cott. Vesp.
B. 16. in Ritson's Ancient Songs, i. 118. ed. 1829; Dunbar's
Dirige to the King at Stirling, Poems, i. 86. ed. Laing; and the
following lines of a rare tract entitled A Commemoration or Dirige
of Bonner, &c., by Lemeke Auale, 1569,-

"Placebo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo.
Heu me, beware the bug, out quod Bonner alas,
De profundis clamavi, how is this matter come to pass.
Laevavi oculos meos from a dark deep place," &c.
sig. A viii.
(Placebo Domine -I will please the Lord"
Heu me-"Woe is me"
De profundis clamavi-"I have cried out from the depths"
Laevavi oculos meos-"I have raised my eyes")

Other pieces of the kind might be pointed out.

3. Philip Sparrow] Philip, or Phip, was a familiar name given to a
sparrow from its note being supposed to resemble that sound.

4. Carrow] A nunnery in the suburbs of Norwich. "Here [at
Norwich]," says Tanner, "was an ancient hospital or nunnery
dedicated to St. Mary and St. John; to which K. Stephen having
given lands and meadows without the south gate, Seyna and
Leftelina two of the sisters, A. D. 1146, began the foundation of
a new monastery called Kairo, Carow, or Carhou, which was
dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary, and consisted of a prioress
and nine Benedictine nuns." Not. Mon. p. 347. ed. 1744. In 1273,
Pope Gregory the Tenth inhibited the Prioress and convent from
receiving more nuns than their income would maintain, upon their
representation that the English nobility, whom they could not
resist, had obliged them to take in so many sisters that they were
unable to support them. At the Dissolution, the number of nuns was
twelve. The site of the nunnery, within the walls, contained about
ten acres. It was granted, with its chief revenues, in the 30th
Henry viii. to Sir John Shelton, knight, who fitted up the parlour
and hall, which were noble rooms, when he came to reside there,
not long after the Dissolution. It continued in the Shelton family
for several generations.

This nunnery was during many ages a place of education for the
young ladies of the chief families in the diocese of Norwich, who
boarded with and were taught by the nuns. The fair Jane or Johanna
Scroupe of the present poem was, perhaps, a boarder at Carow.

See more concerning Carow in Dugdale's Monast. (new ed.) iv. 68
sqq., and Blomefield's Hist. of Nor folk, ii. 862 sqq. ed. fol.

5. Nuns Black] i.e. Black Nuns,-Benedictines.

6. The tears down hailed] So Hawes;

"That evermore the salt tears down hailed."
The Pastime of pleasure, sig. Q viii. ed. 1555.

7. Gib our cat] Gib, a contraction of Gilbert, was a name formerly
given to a male cat:

Gib our Cat,
That awaiteth Mice and Rats to killen."
Romaunt of the Rose,-Chaucer's Works, fol. 136. ed. 1602.

8. Dominum, cum tribularer, clamavi] "When I was in tribulation I
cried to our Lord" G. Gunhouse.

9. Acherontes' well] i.e. Acheron's well. So,-after the fashion of
our early poets,-Skelton writes Zenophontes for Xenophon, Eneidos
for Eneis, Achilliedos for Achilleis, &c.

10. outray] i.e. vanquish, overcome: and so in the following
passages.

"Whom Hercules most strong and courageous,
Sometime outrayed, and slew him with his hand."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. i. leaf xxvii. ed. Wayland.

"All be that Croesus fought long in his defence,
He finally by Cyrus was outrayed,
And deprived by knightly violence,
Take in the field," &c.
Ibid. B. ii. leaf lviii.

"But it may fall, a dwarf in his right,
To outray a giant for all his great might."
Ibid. B. iii. leaf lxvii.

11. Levavi oculos meos in montes] "I have lifted up mine eyes unto
the mountains" G. Gunhouse.

12. Zenophontes] i.e. Xenophon: see note 9 above.

13. For to keep his cut,
With, Philip, keep your cut!] Compare Sir Philip Sidney in a
sonnet;

"Good brother Philip, I have borne you long,
I was content you should in favour creep,
While craftily you seem'd your cut to keep,
As though that fair soft hand did you great wrong."
Astrophel and Stella, p. 548. ed. 1613.

Brome in The Northern Lass, 1632;

"A bonny bonny Bird I had
A bird that was my Marrow:
A bird whose pastime made me glad,
And Philip 'twas my Sparrow.
A pretty Playfere: Chirp it would,
And hop, and fly to fist,
Keep cut, as 'twere a Usurers Gold,
And bill me when I list."
Act iii. sc. 2. sig. G 2.

and in The New Academy; "But look how she turns and keeps cut like
my Sparrow. She will be my back Sweet-heart still I see, and love
me behind." Act iv. sc. 1. p. 72. (Five New Plays, 1659).

14. Between my breasts soft
It would lie and rest] So Catullus, in the beginning of his verses
Ad Passerem Lesbiae, (a distinct poem from that mentioned above);

"Passer, delicae meae puellae,
Quicum ludere, quem in sinu tenere," &c.
(Sparrow, my girl's delight,
With which she plays, which she holds to her bosom")

15. Sin in i qui ta tes.] "Without evil"

16. De pro fun dis cla ma vi] "I cried out from the depths"

17. Sulpicia] Lived in the age of Domitian. Her satire De corrupto
statu reipub. temporibus Domitiani, praesertim cum edicto
Philosophos urbe exegisset, ("Of the corrupt condition of the
state in the time of Domitian, especially as shown by the decree
expelling philosophers from the City") may be found in Wernsdorf's
ed. of Poetae Latini Minores, iii. 83.

18. Confitebor tibi, Domine, in toto corde meo] "I will confess to
thee O Lord in my whole heart:" G. Gunhouse.

19. ride and go] A sort of pleonastic expression which repeatedly
occurs in our early writers. [It means ride and walk.]

20. Pargame] i.e. Pergamus.

21. My Sparrow white as milk] Compare Sir P. Sidney;

"They saw a maid who thitherward did run,
To catch her sparrow which from her did swerve,
As she a black-silk Cap on him begun
To sett, for foil of his milk-white to serve."
Arcadia, lib. i. p. 85. ed. 1613.

22. A porta inferi] "Fom the gate of hell"

23. Au di vi vo cem] "I have heard the voice"

24. Ma gni fi cat] "He exalts"

25. Armony] i.e. Armenia.-So in Processus Noah;

"What ground may this be?
Noah. The hills of Armony."
Townley Myst. p. 32.

26. Wherefore the birds yet cry
Of your father's boat] The reading of Kele's ed.,"boards,", is
perhaps the true one;-compare Piers Plowman;

"And [God] came to Noah anon, and bade him not let
Swith go shape a ship of shides and of boards."
Pass. Non. sig. M ii. ed. 1561

and qy. did Skelton write,-

"Whereon the boards yet lie?"

27. untwined] i.e. tore to pieces, destroyed: so again in our
author's Garland of Laurel;

"This goodly flower with storms was untwined."
v. 1445.

28. Libany] i.e. Libya.

29. manticores] "Another manner of beasts there is in India that
ben called manticora, and hath visage of a man, and three huge
great teeth in his throat, he hath eyes like a goat and body of a
lion, tail of a scorpion and voice of a serpent in such wise that
by his sweet song he draweth to him the people and devoureth them
and is more deliverer to go than is a fowl to flee." Caxton's
Mirror of the world, 1480. sig. e vii. See also R. Holme's Ac. of
Armory, 1688. B. ii. p. 212.-This fabulous account is derived from
Pliny.

30. Melanchaetes, that hound] See the story of Actaeon in Ovid's
Metam.;

"Prima Melanchaetes in tergo vulnera fecit."
iii. 232.
("First, Melanchaetes wounds his back.")

31. That his own lord bote,
Might bite asunder thy throat!]-bote, i.e. bit. So in Sir
Tryamoure;

"He took the steward by the throat,
And asunder he it bote."
Early Pop. Poetry (by Utterson), i. 28.

32. The wild wolf Lycaon] See Ovid's Metam. i. 163 sqq. for an
account of Lycaon, king of Arcadia, being transformed into a wolf.
I ought to add, that he figures in a work well known to the
readers of Skelton's time-The Recueil of the Histories of Troy.

33. And go in at my spare,
And creep in at my gore
Of my gown before] "Spare of a gown, fente de la robe." Palsgrave,
p. 273. "That part of women's clothes, sik as of their gown or
petticoat, quhilk under the belt and before is open, commonly is
called the spare." Skene, quoted by Jamieson, Et. Dict. of Scot.
Lang. in v. Spare. Gore, a triangular piece of cloth inserted at
the bottom of a shirt or shift, to give breadth to the lower part
of it.

34. Kyrie, eleison,
Christe, eleison,
Kyrie, eleison!] "Lord, have mercy,
Christ, have mercy
Lord, have mercy!"

35. Lauda anima mea, Dominum] "May my soul praise you, O Lord"

36. To weep with me look that ye come,
All manner of birds in your kind, &c.] Compare Ovid (see note 1
above);

"Psittacus, Eois imitatrix ales ab Indis,
Occidit: exequias ite frequenter, aves.
Ite, piae volucres, et plangite pectora pennis,
Et rigido teneras ungue notate genas.
Horrida pro moestis lanietur pluma capillis,
Pro longa resonent carmina vestra tuba."
Amor. lib. ii. El. vi. 5. 1.
("Our parrot, winged mimic of the human voice, sent from farthest
Ind, is dead. Come ye in flocks, ye birds, unto his obsequies.
Come, ye pious denizens of the air; beat your bosoms with your
wings and with your rigid claws, score furrows on your dainty
heads. Even as mourners rend their hair, rend ye your ruffled
plumes. Since the far-sounding clarion is silent, sing ye a
doleful song" J. Lewis May)

37. jangling] i.e. babbling, chattering-an epithet generally
applied to the jay by our old poets.

38. The dotterel, that foolish peak] The dotterel is said to allow
itself to be caught, while it imitates the gestures of the fowler:
peak, seems here to be used by Skelton in the sense of-
contemptible fellow; so in his Colyn Cloute;

Of such Pater-noster peaks
All the world speaks."
v. 264.

And see Todd's Johnson's Dict., and Richardson's Dict. in v. Peak.

39. To keep just plain-song,
Our chanters shall be the cuckoo] So Shakespeare mentions "the
plain-song cuckoo gray." Mids. Night's Dream, act iii. sc. 1.

40. peewit the lapwing] In some parts of England, the lapwing is
called peewit from its peculiar cry.

41. The bittern with his bump] "The Bitter, or Bittern, Bumpeth,
when he puts his Bill in the reeds." R. Holme's Ac. of Armory,
1688. B. ii. p. 310.

42. Menander] Means here Maeander: but I have not altered the
text; because our early poets took great liberties with classical
names; because all the eds. of Skelton's Speak, Parrot, have

"Alexander, a gander of Menander's pool."
v. 178.

and because the following passage occurs in a poem by some
imitator of Skelton;

"Wots not where to wander,
Whether to Meander,
Or unto Menander."
The Image of Hypocrisy, Part Third.

43. wake] i.e. watching of the dead body during the night.

44. The owl, that is so foul]-foul, i.e. ugly. The Houlate, (in
the poem so called, by Holland), says,

"Thus all the fowls, for my filth, has me at feud."
Pinkerton's Scot. Poems, iii. 149.

45. the gaggling gant]-gaggling is cackling: Our author in his
Elynour Rumming has

"In came another dant,
With a goose and a gant."
v. 515.

where gant is plainly used for gander. In the present passage,
however, gant must have a different signification ("The goose and
the gander" being mentioned v. 435), and means, I apprehend,-wild
goose. [Rather gannet, solan goose, as explained by Way, Promptor.
Parvul. vol. i. p. 186.]

46. The barnacle] i.e. The goose-barnacle, concerning the
production of which the most absurd fables were told and credited:
some asserted that it was originally the shell-fish called
barnacle, others that it grew on trees, &c.

47. Money they shall deal, &c.] According to the ancient custom at
funerals.

48. brabbling] i.e. clamour, noise-properly, quarrel, squabble.

49. the osprey
That putteth fishes to a fray]-fray, i.e. fright. It was said that
when the osprey, which feeds on fish, hovered over the water, they
became fascinated and turned up their bellies.

50. The stork also,
That maketh his nest
In chimneys to rest;
Within those walls
No broken galls
May there abide
Of cuckoldry side] The stork breeds in chimney-tops, and was
fabled to forsake the place, if the man or wife of the house
committed adultery. The following lines of Lydgate will illustrate
the rest of the passage:

"a certain knight,
Gyges called, thing shameful to be told,
To speak plain English, made him [i.e. Candaules] cuckold.
Alas! I was not advised well before,
Unconningly to speak such language:
I should have said how that he had an horn,
Or sought some term with a fair visage,
To excuse my rudeness of this great outrage:
And in some land Cornodo men do them call,
And some affirm that such folk have no gall."
Fall of Princes, B. ii. leaf lvi. ed Wayland.

51. The ostrich, that will eat
An horseshoe so great].-In Struthiocamelus, a portion of that
strange book Philomnythie, &c., by Tho. Scot., 1616, a merchant
seeing an ostrich, in the desert, eating iron, asks

"What nourishment can from those metals grow? 
The Ostrich answers; Sir, I do not eat
This iron, as you think I do, for meat.
I only keep it, lay it up in store,
To help my needy friends, the friendless poor.
I often meet (as far and near I go)
Many a foundered horse that wants a shoe,
Serving a Master that is moneyless 
Such I relieve and help in their distress"
Sig. E 7.

52. at a braid] Has occurred before in our author's Bowge of
Court, where it means - in an instant; but here it seems to have a
somewhat different meaning, and to signify-at an effort, at a
push. "At a braid, Faisant mon effort, ton effort, son effort,
&c." Palsgrave, p. 831. This expression is used here in connection
with singing: [?] and in one of the Christmas Carols, printed for
the Percy Society, p. 51, we find,

"Wherefore sing we all at a braid, Noel."

53. E-la] i.e. the highest note in the scale of music.

54. Ne quando
Male cantando,] "Nor when, singing badly"

55. The best that we can,
To make him our bell-man,
And let him ring the bells;
He can do nothing else] "Sit campanista, qui non vult esse
sophista, Let him be a bell-ringer, that will be no good Singer."
Withals's Dict. p. 178. ed. 1634.

56. Chanticleer, our cock,
. . . .
By the astrology
That he hath naturally,&c.] So Chaucer;

"But when the cock, common Astrologer,
Gan on his breast to beat," &c.
Troilus and Cressida, B. iii. fol. 164.-Works, ed. 1602.

See also Lydgate's Wars of Troy, B. i. sig. D v. ed. 1555; and his
copy of verses (entitled in the Catalogue Advices for people to
keep a guard over their tongues), MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 132.

57. Albumasar] A famous Arabian, of the ninth century.

58. Haly] Another famous Arabian: "claruit circa A. C. 1100."
Fabr. Bibl. Gr. Xiii. 17.

59. Partlot his hen] So in Chaucer's Nun's Priests Tale; Lydgate's
copy of verses (entitled in the Catalogue Advices for people to
keep a guard over their tongues), MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 132; and G.
Douglas's Prol. to the xii Book of his Eneados, p. 401. l. 54. ed.
Ruddiman, who conjectures that the name was applied to a hen in
reference to the ruff (the partlet), or ring of feathers about her
neck.

60. Libera me] "Set me free."

61. B molle] i.e. B flat. So in the last stanza of a poem by W.
Cornishe, printed in Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568;

"I keep by round and he by square
The one is B molle and the other B quare."
(B quare is B sharp)

62. Pliny showeth all
In his Story Natural] See Historia Naturalis, lib. x. sect. 2.

63. the sedean] Does it mean subdean, or subdeacon? [Sedekine,
sub-deacon. Halliwell, Dict.]

64. the noble falcon] "There are seven kinds of Falcons, and among
them all for her nobleness and hardy courage, and withal the
frankness of her mettle, I may, and do mean to place the Falcon
gentle in chief." Turbervile's Book of Falconry, &c. p. 25. ed.
1611.

65. the gyrfalcon] "Is a gallant Hawk to behold, more huge then
any other kind of Falcon, &c." ibid. p. 42.

66. The tiercel gentle] Is properly the male of the goshawk; but
Skelton probably did not use the term in its exact meaning, for in
the fifth line after this he mentions "the goshawk." It is
commonly said (see Steevens's note, on Romeo and Juliet, act ii.
sc. 2.) to be called tiercel because it is a tierce or third less
than the female. But, according to Turbervile, " he is termed a
Tiercelet, for that there are most commonly disclosed three birds
in one self eyrie, two Hawks and one Tiercel." Book of Falconry,
&c. p. 59. ed. 1611.

67. Amice]- properly the first of the six vestments common to the
bishop and presbyters. "First do on the amice, then the alb, then
the girdle, then the maniple, then the stole, then the chasuble."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. E iiii. ed. 1530.

68. The saker] A hawk "much like the Falcon Gentle for largeness,
and the Haggard for hardiness." Turbervile's Book of Falconry, &c.
p. 45. ed. 1611.

69. The lanners and the merlins] "They are more blank (i.e. white)
Hawks then any other, they have less beaks than the rest, and are
less armed and pounced then other Falcons be." Turbervile's Book
of Falconry, &c. p. 47. ed. 1611. - the merlins,-the smallest of
the hawks used by falconers.

70. The hobby] "Of all birds of prey that belong to the Falconers
use, I know none less than the Hobby, unless it be the Merlyn."
Turbervile's Book of Falconry, &c. p. 53. ed. 1611.

71. the musket] i.e. the male sparrow-hawk. "You must note, that
all these kind of hawks have their male birds and cocks of every
sort and gender, as the Eagle his Erne and the Sparrow hawk his
Musket." Turbervile's Book of Falconry, &c. p. 3. "The male
sparrow hawk is called a musket." The Country Farm, p. 877. ed.
1600.

72. The kestrel] A sort of base-bred hawk.

73. holy water clerk] Aquaebajulus, an office usually mentioned
with contempt.

74. Requiem aeternum dona eis, Domine] "Grant them eternal rest, O
Lord"

75. Credo videre bona Domini] "I believe I shall see the good
Lord"

76. Domine, exaudi orationem meam] "Lord, hear my prayer"

77. Oremus,
Deus, cui proprium est misereri et parcere] "Let us pray,
O God whose nature is to have mercy and to spare"

78. And wrapped in a maiden's smock] Spenser seems to have
recollected this passage: he says, that when Cupid was stung by a
bee, Venus

"took him straight full piteously lamenting,
And wrapt him in her smock."

See a little poem in his Works, viii. 185. ed. Todd.

79. the pretty wren,
That is our Lady's hen] So in a poem (attributed, on no authority,
to Skelton) entitled Harmony of Birds, n. d., and reprinted entire
in Typogr. Antiq. iv. 380. ed. Dibdin;

"Then said the wren,
I am called the hen
Of our lady most comely."
p. 382.

Wilbraham, in his Cheshire Gloss. p. 105, gives the following
metrical adage as common in that county;

"The Robin and the Wren
Are God's cock and hen,
The Martin and the Swallow
Are God's mate and marrow."

In the Ballad of Kind Kittock, attributed to Dunbar, we are told
that after death she "was our Lady's hen-wife," Poems, ii. 36. ed.
Laing.-An Elysium, very different from that described in the
somewhat profane passage of our text, is assigned by the delicate
fancy of Ovid to the parrot of his mistress, in the poem to which
(as I have before observed, Skelton seems to have had an eye;

"Colle sub Elysio nigra nemus illice frondens," &c.
Amor. 6. 49.
("There, in Elysium, on a hill-side's gentle slope there stands a
forest of broad, shady oaks" J. Lewis May)

80. Of Gawain] Son of King Lot and nephew of King Arthur.
Concerning him, see the Morte d'Arthur (of which some account is
given in Note 83 below,-Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, in MS.
Cott. Nero A. x. fol. 91,-Ywaine and Gawain, in Ritson's Met. Rom.
vol. i.,-the fragment of The Marriage of Sir Gawaine, at the end
of Percy's Rel. of A. E. P.,-The Adventures of Arthur at the Terne
Wathelyn, in Laing's Early Pop. Poetry of Scot., (the same
romance, from a different MS., under the title of Sir Gawain and
Sir Galaron of Galloway, in Pinkerton's Scot. Poems, vol. iii.),-
The Knightly Tale of Golagrus and Gawain, reprinted at Edinburgh
in 1827 from the ed. of 1508, (the same romance, under the title
of Gawain and Gologras, in Pinkerton's Scot. Poems, vol. iii.),-
and the romance of Arthur and Merlin, from the Auchinleck MS.,
published by the Abbotsford Club, 1838.

I had written the above note before the appearance of a valuable
volume put forth by the Bannatyne Club, entitled Syr Gawayne; A
collection of Ancient Romance-Poems, by Scotish and English
Authors, relating to that celebrated Knight of the Round Table,
with an Introduction, &c., by Sir F. Madden, 1839.

81. Sir Guy] In The Rime of Sir Thopas, Chaucer mentions "Sir Guy"
as one of the "romances of pris." For an account of, extracts
from, and an analysis of, the English romance on the subject of
this renowned hero of Warwick, see Ritson's Met. Rom. (Dissert.)
i. xcii., Warton's Hist. of E. P. i. 169. ed. 4to., and Ellis's
Spec. of Met. Rom. ii. I must also refer the reader to a volume,
issued by the Abbotsford Club, entitled The Romances of Sir Guy of
Warwick, and Rembrun his son. Now first edited from the Auchinleck
MS. 1840.

82. the Golden Fleece,
How Jason it won] A book of the whole life of Jason was printed by
Caxton in folio, n. d. (about 1475), being a translation by that
venerable typographer from the French of Raoul le Fevre. A copy of
it (now before me) in the King's Library, though apparently
perfect, has no title of any sort. Specimens of this prose-
romance, which is not without merit, may be found in Dibdin's
Biblioth. Spenc. iv. 199.-The story of Jason is also told by
Chaucer, Legend of Hipsiphile and Medea; by Gower, Conf. Am. Lib.
v. ; and, at considerable length, by Lydgate. Wars of Troy, B. i.

83. Of Arthur's Round Table,
With his knights commendable,
And Dame Gaynour, his queen,
Was somewhat wanton, I ween;
How Sir Lancelot de Lake
Many a spear brake
For his lady's sake;
Of Tristram, and King Mark,
And all the whole work
Of Belle Isolde his wife
For whom was much strife;] Concerning the various romances on the
subject of Arthur, Lancelot, Tristram, &c. see Sir F. Madden's
Introduction to the volume already mentioned, Syr Gawayne, &c.-In
this passage, however, Skelton seems to allude more particularly
to a celebrated compilation from the French- the prose romance of
The Birth, Life, and Acts of King Arthur, &c., commonly known by
the name of Morte d'Arthur. At the conclusion of the first edition
printed in folio by Caxton (and reprinted in 1817 with an Introd.
and Notes by Southey) we are told "this book was ended the ix.
year of the reign of king Edward the Fourth by sir Thomas Malory,
knight" . . . "which book was reduced into English by Sir Thomas
Malory knight as before is said and by me [Caxton] divided into
xxi books chaptered and emprinted and finished in th'abbey
Westminster the last day of July the year of our lord mcccmxxxv. "

In the Morte d'Arthur, the gallant and courteous Sir Lancelot du
Lake, son of King Ban of Benwyck, figures as the devoted lover of
Arthur's queen, Guinevere (Skelton's "Gaynour"), daughter of King
Lodegreans of Camelard. On several occasions, Guinevere after
being condemned to be burnt, is saved by the valour of her knight.
But their criminal intercourse proves in the end the destruction
of Arthur and of the fellowship of the Round Table. Guinevere
becomes a nun, Lancelot a priest. The last meeting of the guilty
pair,-the interment of Guinevere's body by her paramour,-and the
death of Lancelot, are related with no ordinary pathos and
simplicity. The same work treats fully of the loves of Sir
Tristram, son of King Melyodas of Lyonesse, and La Belle Isoud
(Skelton's "Belle Isolde"), daughter of King Angus of Ireland, and
wife of King Mark of Cornwall, Tristram's uncle.-(Tristram's wife,
Isoud La Blaunche Maynys, was daughter of King Howel of
Bretagne).-The excuse for the intrigue between Tristram and his
uncle's spouse is, that their mutual passion was the consequence
of a love-potion, which they both drank without being aware of its
nature.

"In our forefathers time," observes Ascham, some what severely,
"when Papistry, as a standing pool, covered and overflowed all
England, few books were read in our tongue, saving certain books
of Chivalry, as they said for pastime and pleasure, which, as some
say, were made in Monasteries, by idle Monks, or wanton Canons: as
one for example Morte Arthur: the whole pleasure of which book
standeth in two special points, in open manslaughter, and bold
bawdry: in which book, those be counted the noblest knights, that
do kill most men without any quarrel, and commit foulest
adulteries by subtlest shifts: as Sir Lancelot, with the wife of
king Arthur his master: Sir Tristram, with the wife of King Mark
his uncle: Sir Lamorak, with the wife of king Lot, that was his
own aunt. This is good stuff, for wise men to laugh at, or honest
men to take pleasure at. Yet I know, when God's Bible was banished
the Court, and Morte Arthure received into the Prince's chamber."
The School Master, fol. 27. ed. 1571.

84. - of syr Lybius,
Named Dysconius] See the romance of Lybeaus Disconus (Le beau
desconnu), in Ritson's Met. Rom. ii.; also Sir F. Madden's note in
the volume entitled Syr Gawayne, &c. p. 346.

85. Of Quater Fylx Amund,
. . how they rode eche one
On Bayarde Mountalbon;
Men se hym now and then
In the forest of Arden] The English prose romance on the subject
of these worthies came originally from the press of Caxton, an
imperfect copy of his edition n. d. folio, being in Lord Spencer's
library; see Dibdin's AEdes Althorp. ii. 298: and that it was also
translated from the French by Caxton himself, there is every
reason to believe; see Dibdin's Bibliog. Decam. 438. According to
the colophon of Copland's ed., this romance was reprinted in 1504
by Wynkyn de Worde; see Typ. Antiq. ii. 116. ed. Dibdin. Copland's
edition has the following title: The right pleasant and goodly
History of the four sons of Aimon the which for the excellent
indicting of it, and for the notable Prowess and great virtues
that were in them: is no less pleasant to read, than worthy to be
known of all estates both high and low, M.CCCCC.LIIII. folio.

The names of the brothers were "Reynawde, Alarde, Guycharde, and
Rycharde, that were wonderful fair, witty, great, mighty, and
valiaunt, specially Reynawde which was the greatest and the
tallest man that was found at that time in all the world. For he
had xvi. feet of length and more." fol. i. ed. Copl. The father of
this hopeful family was Duke of Ardeyne.

Bayarde-(properly a bay horse, but used for a horse in general)-"
was such a horse, that never was his like in all the world nor
never shall be except Busifal the horse of the great King
Alexander. For as for to have run. xxx. mile together he would
never have sweated. The said Bayarde this horse was grown in the
Isle of Boruscan; and Mawgys the son of the duke Benes of
Aygremount had given to his cousin Reynawde, that after made the
King Charlemagne full wroth and sorry." fol. v. Reynawde had a
castle in Gascoigne called Mountawban; hence Skelton's expression,
"Bayarde Mountalbon." A woodcut on the title-page represents the
four brothers riding "each one" upon the poor animal. "I," says
Reynawde, relating a certain adventure, "mounted upon Bayarde and
my brethern I made to mount also th'one before and the two other
behind me, and thus rode we all four upon my horse Bayarde." fol.
lxxxii. Charlemagne, we are told, made peace with Reynawde on
condition that he should go as a pilgrim, poorly clothed and
begging his bread, to the holy land, and that he should deliver up
Bayarde to him. When Charlemagne had got possession of the horse,-
"Ha Bayarde, Bayarde," said he, "thou hast often angered me, but I
am come to the point, god gramercy, for to avenge me;" and
accordingly he caused Bayarde to be thrown from a bridge into the
river Meuse, with a great millstone fastened to his neck. "Now ye
ought to know that after that Bayarde was cast in the river of
Meuse: he went unto the bottom as ye have heard, and might not
come up for because of the great stone that was at his neck which
was horrible heavy, and when Bayarde saw he might none otherwise
escape: he smote so long and so hard with his feet upon the
millstone: that he burst it, and came again above the water and
began to swim, so that he passed it all over at the other side,
and whan he was come to lande: He shaked himselfe for to make fall
the water fro him and began to cry high, and made a marvellous
noise, and after began to run so swiftly as the tempest had borne
him away, and entered in to the great forest of Ardennes . . . and
wit it for very certain that the folk of the countrey sayen, that
he is yet alive within the wood of Ardennes. But wit it when he
seeth man or woman: He runneth anon away, so that no body may come
near him." fol. cxlv.

86. Of Judas Machabeus] "Gaultier de Belleperche Arbalestrier, ou
Gaultier Arbalestrier de Belleperche, commenca le Romans de Judas
Machabee, poursuivit jusques à sa mort . . . . Pierre du Riez le
continua jusques à la fin." ("Gaultier &c. started the Romance of
Judas Maccabeus, and worked on it until his death, Pierre du Riez
continued it to the end.") Fauchet's Reveil de l'origine de la
langue et poesie Française, &c., p. 197.

87. of Caesar Julius] In the prologue to an ancient MS. poem, The
book of Stories called Cursor Mundi, translated from the French,
mention is made of the romance "Of Julius Caesar the emperor."
Warton's Hist. of E. P., i. 123, note, ed. 4to.

88. of the love between
Paris and Vienne] This prose romance was printed by Caxton in
folio: Here beginneth t'history of the noble right valiant and
worthy knight Paris, and of the fair Vienne the dauphin's daughter
of Viennois, the which suffered many adversities because of their
true love ere they could enjoy the effect therof of each other.
Colophon: Thus endeth t'history of the noble, &c. &c., translated
out of French into English by William Caxton at Westminster
finshed the last day of August the year of our Lord MCCCCLXXXV,
and enprinted the xix day of December the same year, and the first
year of the reign of king Harry the seventh.

Gawin Douglas tells us in his Palace of Honour, that, among the
attendants on Venus,

"Of France I saw there Paris and Vienne."
p. 16. Bann. ed.

89. duke Hannibal]-duke, i.e. leader, lord.- So Lydgate;

"Which brother was unto duke Hannibal."
Fall of Princes, B. ii. leaf xlv. ed. Wayland;

and in a copy of verses entitled Thank God of all, he applies the
word to our Saviour;

"The dearworth duke that deem us shall."
MS. Cott. Calig. A ii. fol. 66.

90. Of Hector of Troy,
That was all their joy] See the Wars of Troy by Lydgate, a
paraphrastical translation of Guido de Colonna's Historia Trojana:
it was first printed in 1513. See too the Recueil of the Histories
of Troy. Compare Hawes;

"Of the worthy Hector that was all their joye."
The Pastime of pleasure, sig. P iii. ed. 1555.

91. of the love so hot
That made Troilus to dote
Upon fair Cressid, &c.] See Chaucer's Troilus and Creseide.

92. ouche] i.e. a buckle, clasp, brooch; or any other ornament. -
Concerning ouche, a word whose etymology and primary signification
are uncertain, see Tyrwhitt's Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant. Tales, v.
Nouches, and Richardson's Dict. in v. Ouch.-Here, perhaps, it
means a brooch: for in the third book of Chaucer's Troilus and
Creseide, Cressid proposes that Pandarus should bear a "blue ring"
from her to Troilus; and (ibid.) afterwards the lovers

"interchanged their rings,
Of which I can not tellen no scripture,
But well I wot, a broche of gold and azure,
In which a Ruby set was like an heart,
Cresseid him gave, and stuck it on his shirt."
Chaucer's Works, fol. 164. ed. 1602.

After Cressid becomes acquainted with Diomede, she gives him a
brooch, which she had received from Troilus on the day of her
departure from Troy. Ibid. fols. 179, 181.

93. That made the male to to wring] So Skelton elsewhere;

"That ye can not espy
Howe the male doth wry."
Colyn Cloute, v. 687.

"The countering at Calais
Wrung us on the males."
Why come ye not to Court, v. 74.

and so Lydgate;

"Now all so mote I thrive and thé, said he then,
I can not see for all wits and espies,
And craft and cunning, but that the male so wries
That no cunning may prevail and appear
Against a woman's wit and her answer."
The prohemy of a marriage, &c. MS. Harl. 372. fol. 50.

94. kiss the post] i.e. to be baffled, fail of one's object. So
Barclay;

"Yet from beginning absent if thou be,
Either shalt thou lose thy meat and kiss the post," &c.
Egloge ii. sig. B iiii. ed. 1570.

The expression is found in much later writers: see, for instance,
Heywood's Woman Killed with Kindness, sig. E 2. ed. 1617.

95. of Antiochus] Whom Chaucer calls "the cursed king Antiochus."
The Man of Law's Prol. v. 4502. ed. Tyr. His story may be found in
Gower's Confessio Amantis, lib. viii. fol. clxxv. sqq. ed. 1554.

96. De Antiquitatibus] "Of the Antiquities " i.e The Antiquites of
the Jews by Flavius Josephus.

97. of Mardocheus,
And of great Ahasuerus, &c.] "Even scripture-history was turned
into romance. The story of Esther and Ahasueras, or of Anion or
Hanlon, and Mardocheus or Mordecai, was formed into a fabulous
poem." Warton, note on Hist. of E. P. ii. 178. (where some lines
of the romance are quoted from a MS.) ed. 4to.

98. Vesca] i.e. Vashti.

99. Of king Alexander] See Weber's Introduction, p. xx. sqq., and
the romance of King Alexander in his Met. Rom. i.; also The Book
of the most noble and vailiant Conqueror Alexander the Great,
reprinted by the Bannatyne Club, 1831.

100. of king Evander] As the lady declares (v. 756) that she was
slightly acquainted with Virgil, we may suppose that her knowledge
of this personage was derived from The Recueil of the Histories of
Troy, and Caxton's Book of Eneydos.

101. too diffuse for me] i.e. too difficult for me to understand.
"Diffuse, hard to be understand." Palsgrave, p. 310.

"But oft yet by it [logic] a thing plain, bright and pure,
Is made diffuse, unknown, hard and obscure."
Barclay's Ship of Fooles, fol. 53. ed. 1570.

102. ennewed] "I Ennewe, I set the last and freshest colour upon a
thing, as painters do when their work shall remain to declare
their cunning, Je renouvelle. Your image is in manner done; so
soon as I have ennewed it I will send it you home," &c. Palsgrave,
p. 536.

"Alike ennewed with quickness of colour,
Both of the rose and the lily flower."
Lydgate's Wars of Troy, B. ii. sig. I ii. ed. 1555.

103. John Lydgate
Writeth after an higher rate] Lydgate, however, disclaims all
elevation of style: see his Fall of Princes, Prol. sig. A iii. ed.
Wayland; his Wars of Troy, B. ii. sigs. F ii, K ii, B. v. sigs. E
e i. ii. iii. ed. 1555.

104. No man that can amend, &c.] So Hawes, speaking of the works
of Chaucer, Gower, and Lydgate;

"Whose famous draughts no man can amende."
The Pastime of pleasure, sig. G iiii. ed. 1555.

105. In worth] i.e. kindly.

106. Flos volucrum formose, vale!
. . . . 
Pectore semper eris] "Farewell, beautiful flower of birds! Philip,
you lie beneath this marble, you who were dear to me. Your image
will be graven on my heart, as long as the stars shine in the sky"

107. Per me laurigerum
. . . . 
Bien m'en souvient] "This poem is allowed to be sung by me,
Skelton, the Poet Laureate of Britain. Johanna, the virgin who
owned the bird, is most excellent, more beautiful in her person,
purer than the Naiad; Corinna was taught it, but the learned
themselves know it. I well remember it." ???

108. Beati immaculati in via,
O gloriosa femina] "Blessed are the undefiled in the way, O most
renowned lady"

109. If Arethusa will send
Me influence to indite] Skelton recollected that Virgil had
invoked this nymph as a Muse;

"Extremum hunc, Arethusa, mihi concede laborem."
Ecl. x. 1.
("My last task this - vouchsafe me it, Arethusa!"
H.R.Fairclough)

110. She flourisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue] So Lydgate:

"And ever increasing in virtue new and new."
The Temple of Glas., sig. b vii. n. d. 4to.

111. Hac claritate gemina,
O gloriosa femina] "O most renowned and doubly bright lady"

112. Retribue servo tuo, vivifica me!
Labia mea laudabunt te]
"Reward your servant, so that I may live!
My lips praise you"

113. odious Envy, &c.] Here Skelton has an eye to Ovid's picture
of Envy:

"Pallor in ore sedet; macies in corpore toto:
Nusquam recta acies: livent rubigine dentes:
Pectora felle virent: lingua est suffusa veneno.
Risus abest, nisi quem visi movere dolores.
Nec, fruitur somno, vigilacibus excita curis:
Sed videt ingratos, intabescitque videndo,
Successus hominum: carpitque et carpitur una:
Suppliciumque suum est."
Met. ii. 775
("Her sight is skewed, her teeth are livid with decay, her breast
is green with bile, and her tongue is suffused with venom. She
only smiles at the sight of suffering. She never sleeps, excited
by watchful cares. She finds men's successes disagreeable, and
pines away at the sight. She gnaws and being gnawed is also her
own punishment." A. S. Kline)

See too the description of Envy in Piers Plowman, sig. F ii. ed.
1561.

114. Lean as a rake] From Chaucer.

"As lean was his horse as is a rake."
Prol. to Cant. Tales, v. 289. ed. Tyr.

115. Legem pone mihi, domina, viam justificationum tuarum!
Quemadmodum desiderat cervus ad fontes aquarum]
"Set before me for a law the way of thy justifications, O Lady!
As the hart panteth after the fountains of water."

116. With her browes bent] -bent, i.e. arched. Compare Hawes;

"Her forehead steep with fair brows ybent,
Her eyen gray."
The Pastime of pleasure. sig. S i. ed. 1555

I may just observe that these passages (and many others which
might be cited) show how unnecessarily Ritson substituted "brent"
for "bent" in The Squire of Low Degree; see his note, Met. Rom.
iii. 351.

117. Polexene] i.e. Polyxena, the daughter of Priam,-celebrated by
Lydgate in his Wars of Troy, and by others.

118. Memor esto verb tui servo tuo!
Servus tuus sum ego] "Be thou mindful of thy word to thy servant.
I am thy servant."

119. with favour fret]- favour,i.e. beauty; so Skelton has
"features favourable," in the second of his Divers Ballads and
Ditties Solacious, v. 8; fret, I believe, does not here mean
fraught (see Tyrwhitt's Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant. Tales), but is
equivalent to-wrought, adorned,- in allusion to fret-work; so in
our author's Garland of Laurel,-

"Fret all with orient pearls of Garnet."
v. 485.

120. The columbine commendable,
The jelofer amiable] jelofer is perhaps what we now call
gillyflower; but it was formerly the name for the whole class of
carnations, pinks, and sweet-williams. So Graunde Amoure terms La
Bell Pucell;

"The gentil jelofer, the goodly columbine."
Hawes's Pastime of pleasure, sig. N i. ed. 1555.

121. Bonitatem fecisti cum servo tuo, domina,
Et ex praecordiis sonant praeconia]
"Thou hast done well with thy servant, O lady.
And declarations sound forth from the breast."

122. scar] i.e the wart.

123. Enhatched] i.e. Inlaid: our author has the word again in his
Garland of Laurel;

"Enhatched with pearl and stones preciously."
v. 40.

124. To forget deadly sin] Compare the first of our author's
Divers Ballads and Ditties Solacious, v. 11.

125. Defecit in salutatione tua anima mea;
Quid petis filio, mater dulcissima? babae!]
"My soul hath fainted after thy salvation.
What do you ask for your son, O sweetest mother? O wonderful!"

126. make to the lure] A metaphor from falconry: "Lure is that
whereto Falconers call their young Hawks, by casting it up in the
air, being made of feathers and leather, in such wise that in the
motion it looks not unlike a fowl." Latham's Falconry (Explan. of
Words of Art), 1658.

127. Quomodo dilexi legem tuam, domina!
Recedant vetera, nova sint omnia]
"How I am pleased with your law, O lady!
The old things have departed, everything is new."

128. And to amend her tale,
When she list to avail] - avail is generally-to let down, to
lower: [condescended to show me some favor?] but I know not how to
explain the present passage, which appears to be defective.

129. And hands soft as silk,
Whiter than the milk,
That are so quickly veined] - quickly veined i.e. lively veined.
Compare Hawes;

"By her proper hand, soft as any silk."
The Pastime of pleasure, sig. II iiii. ed. 1555.

"Her fingers small, and thereto right long,
White as the milk, with blue veins among."
Ibid. sig. S

130. reclaimed] A metaphor from falconry. "Reclaiming is to tame,
make gentle, or to bring a Hawk to familiarity with the man."
Latham's Falconry (Explan. of Words of Art), 1658.

131. Iniquos odio habui!
Non calumnientur me superbi]
"I have hated the unjust!
Let not the proud calumniate me."

132. She is plainly express
Egeria, the goddess,
And like to her image,
Emportured with courage,
A lover's pilgrimage] I must leave the reader to form his own idea
of the meaning of the last two lines, which are beyond my
comprehension. [Perhaps-made to bear herself (or else, simply
portrayed) with courage (feeling); a fit object for lovers to make
pilgrimages to.]

133. Mirabilia testimonia tua!
Sicut novellae plantationes in juventute sua] 
"Thy testimonies are wonderful!
As new plants in their youth."

134. So goodly as she dresses,
So properly she presses
The bright golden tresses
Of her hair so fine,
Like Phoebus' beams shine.
Whereto should I disclose
The gartering of her hose?] - Phoebus' beams shine, i.e. the shine
of Phoebus' beams. Compare Hawes;

"Her shining hair so properly she dresses
Alofe her forehead with fair golden tresses
 . . . . .
Her feet proper, she gartered well her hose."
The Pastime of pleasure, sig. S i. ed. 1555

135. Clamavi in toto corde, exaudi me!
Misericordia tua magna est super me] 
"I cried with my whole heart, hear me.
Thy mercy is great towards me."

136. Kirtle] "Kirtle, a garment, corpset, surcot, cotelle."
Palsgrave, p. 236. It has been variously explained (see notes on
Henry IV. Part ii. act ii. sc. 4, Shakespeare by Malone and
Boswell, xvii. 98, 99, Todd's Johnson's Dict., and Nares's
Gloss.), petticoat,-safe-guard or riding-hood,-long cloak,-long
mantle, reaching to the ground, with a head to it that entirely
covered the face, and usually red,-apron,-jacket,-and loose
gown!!! The following note by Gifford on Cynthia's Revels
(Jonson's Works, ii. 260) gives the most satisfactory account of a
kirtle: "Few words have occasioned such controversy among the
commentators on our old plays as this; and all for want of knowing
that it is used in a twofold sense, sometimes for the jacket
merely, and sometimes for the train or upper petticoat attached to
it. A full kirtle was always a jacket and petticoat, a half kirtle
(a term which frequently occurs) was either the one or the other:
but our ancestors, who wrote when this article of dress was
everywhere in use, and when there was little danger of being
misunderstood, most commonly contented themselves with the simple
term (kirtle), leaving the sense to be gathered from the context."

137. Principes persecuti sunt me gratis!
Omnibus consideratis,
Paradisus voluptatis
Haec virgo est dulcissima]
"Princes have persecuted me without cause!
All things considered
A paradise of delights
Is this sweetest girl."

138. Domine, probasti me] "Lord, thou hast proved (i.e.tested) me"

139. Tibi, Domine, commendamus] "To you, Lord, we commend
ourselves."

140. Car elle vaut] "Because she wishes it."

141. Per me laurigerum Britonum Skeltonida vatem] "By me, Skelton,
poet laureate of Britain."

142. Laudibus eximiis merito haec redimita puella est:
Formosam cecini, qua non formosior nulla est; 
Formosam potius quam commendaret Homerus.
Sic juvat interdum rigidos recreare labores,
Nec minus hoc titulo tersa .Minerva mea est.
Rien que plaisir]
"This girl deserves to be garlanded with praises.
I sing of the beauty than whom none is more beautiful.
The beauty greater than the one praised by Homer [i.e. Helen of
Troy]
In this way she makes tedious labour delightful
Not least this little poem. She is my Goddess Minerva.
Nothing but pleasing."

143. an addition] Though found in all the eds. of Philip Sparrow
which I have seen, it was not, I apprehend, originally published
with the poem. It is inserted (and perhaps first appeared) in our
author's Garland of Laurel, v. 1258, where he tells us that some
persons "take grievance, and grudge with frowning countenance," at
his poem on Philip Sparrow,-alluding probably more particularly to
Barclay; see Account of Skelton and his Writings.

144. deprave] i.e. vilify, defame. "Thus was sir Arthur depraved
and evil said of." Morte d'Arthur, B. xxi. c. i. vol. ii. 433. ed.
Southey.

145. Hercules that hell did harrow] Hercules having carried away
from it his friends Theseus and Pirithous, as well as the dog
Cerberus. The harrowing of hell was an expression properly and
constantly applied to our Lord's descent into hell, as related in
the Gospel of Nicodemus. There were several early miracle-plays on
this favourite subject; and Lydgate strangely enough says that
Christ

"Took out of hell souls many a pair,
Maugre Cerberus and al his cruelty."
Testamentum,-MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 49.

I may add, that Warner, speaking of Hercules, uses the words
"harrowed hell." Albion's England, p. 23. ed. 1612.

146. Slew of the Epidaures, &c.] Qy. is not the text corrupted
here?

147. Onocentaures] Like a centaur, but half human and half ass,
rather than horse. However, see AElian De Nat. Anim. lib. xvii. c.
9. ed. Gron., and Phile De Anim. Prop. c. 44. ed. Pauw. Both these
writers describe the onocentaur as having the bosom of a woman. R.
Holme says it "is a Monster, being the Head and Breasts of a Woman
set upon the Shoulders of a Bull." Ac. of Armory, 1688. B. ii. p.
208.

148. Hippocentaures] i.e. centaurs, half human, half horses.

149. He plucked the bull
By the horned skull,
And offered to Cornucopia] The "bull" means Achelous, who, during
his combat with Hercules, assumed that shape:

"Rigidum fera dextera cornu
Dum tenet, infregit; truncaque a fronte revellit.
Naïdes hoc, pomis et odoro flore repletum,
Sacrarunt; divesque meo bona Copia cornu est."
Ovid. Met. ix. 85.
("holding the tough horn in his cruel hand, he broke it and tore
it away from my mutilated brow. The Naiades took it, filling it
with fruit and scented flowers, and made it sacred: the Goddess of
Abundance is rich now because of my horn of plenty." A. S. Kline.)

150.the venomous serpent,
That in hell is never brent] -brent, e. burned. A somewhat profane
allusion to the scriptural expression "the worm dieth not; "-
(worm and serpent were formerly synonymous).

151. Primo Regum] i.e. The First Book of Kings, or, as it is also
called, The First Book of Samuel, chap. xxviii.

"Primo regum as ye may plainly read."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. ii. leaf xxxix ed. Wayland.

152. He bade the Pythoness
. . . . .
But whether it were so,
He were idem in numero,
The self same Samuel, &c.] - Pythoness i.e.-the witch of Endor.

And speak as renably, and fair, and well,
As to the Pythoness did Samuel:
And yet will some men say it was not he," &c.
Chaucer's Friar's Tale, v. 7091. ed. Tyr.

"And secretly this Saul is forth gone
To a woman that should him rede and wiss,
. . . . .
In Israel called a pythoness.
. . . . .
To divines this matter I commit,
Whether it was the soul of Samuel," &c.
Lydgate's Fall of Prynces, B. ii. leaf xl. ed. Wayland.

See also Gower's Conf. Am. B. iv. fol. lxxiii. ed. 1554; Barbour's
Bruce, B. iii. v. 982. ed. Jam.; G. Douglas's Preface to his
Virgil's Aeneados, p. 6, l. 51. ed. Rudd.; and Sir D. Lyndsay's
Monarchy, B. iv. Works, iii. 151. ed. Chalmers.

153. conditions] i.e. qualities. But in our author's Garland of
Laurel, where this "addition" is given, the passage according to
Fake's ed., and rightly, perhaps (compare the preceding lines),
stands thus;

"And by her superstitions
Of wonderful conditions."
v. 1343.

154. idem in numero] "exactly the same."

155. ascry] i.e. to assail (with a shout). In Langtoft's Chronicle
we find,

"Edward was hardy, the Londoners gan he ascry." 
p. 217. ed. Hearne,-(who in Gloss. renders "ascrie "-cry to).

The original French has,

"Sir Eduard fiz le rays, les loundrays escrye."
MS. Cott. Jul. A v. fol. 122.

Roquefort gives "Escrier: Faire entendre son cri d'armes dans une
bataille . . . marcher à l'ennemi, l'attaquer," ("Make one's cries
heard in battle, charge the enemy, attack") &c. Gloss. de la Lang.
Rom. (Sup.): [crier, attaquer, poursuivre avec des cris.("Attack,
pursue with cries") Duconge. Suppl.]

156. Inferias, Philippe, tuas Scroupe pulchra Joanna
Instanter petiit: cur nostri carminis illam
Nunc pudet? est sero; minor est infamia vero
"Philip, your obsequies the fair Joanna Scrope ardently longed
for: why is she now ashamed of our song? It is too late; shame is
less than truth." (PH)

157. Luride, cur, livor, volucris pia funera damnas?
Talia te rapiant rapiunt quae fata volucrem!
Est tamen invidia mors tibi continua.]
"Why, Green Envy, do you condemn the sacred funeral rites of a
sparrow? May the fate which overtook my bird seize upon thee. Yet
malice is a perpetual death to thee" (PH).



THE TUNNING OF ELYNOUR RUMMING
[From the ed. By Kyng and Marche of Certain Books Compiled by
Master Skelton, n.d., collated with the same work, ed. Day, n.d.,
and ed. Lant, n.d., with Marshe's ed. Of Skelton's Works, 1568,
and occasionally with the comparatively modern ed. of Elynour
Rumming by Rand, 1624.]
<1>
HEREAFTER FOLLOWETH THE BOOK CALLED
THE TUNNING<2> OF ELYNOUR RUMMING PER SKELTON LAUREATE

TELL you Ich'ill,<3>
If that ye will
Awhile be still,
Of a comely gill<4>
That dwelt on a hill:
But she is not grill,
For she is somewhat sage
And well worn in age.
For her visage
It would assuage                                               10
A man's courage.

Her loathly leer
Is nothing clear,
But ugly of cheer,
Droopy and drowsy,
Scurvy and lowsy;
Her face all bowsy,
Comely crinkled,
Wondrously wrinkled,
Like a roast pig's ear,                                        20
Bristled with hair.

Her lewd lips twain,
They slaver, men sayne,
Like a ropy rain,
A gummy glair;
She is ugly fair;
Her nose somedeal hooked,
And camously crooked,<5>
Never stopping,
But ever dropping;                                             30
Her skin, loose and slack,
Grained like a sack;
With a crooked back.

Her eyen goundy<6>
Are full unsoundy,
For they are bleared;
And she gray-haired;
Jawed like a jetty;
A man would have pity
To see how she is gummed,                                      40
Fingered and thumbed,
Gently jointed,
Greased and annointed
Up to the knuckles;
The bones of her huckles
Like as they were with buckles
Together made fast:
Her youth is far past:
Footed like a plane,
Legged like a crane;                                           50
And yet she will jet
Like a jolly fet,
In her furred flocket,
And gray russet rocket,
With simper-the-cocket.<7>
Her huke of Lincoln green,<8>
It had been hers, I ween,
More than forty year;
And so doth it appear,
For the green bare threads                                     60
Look like sere weeds,
Withered like hay,
The wool worn away;
And yet, I dare say,
She thinketh herself gay
Upon the holy day
When she doth her array
And girdeth in her gites
Stitched and pranked with pleats;
Her kirtle Bristow-red,<9>                                     70
With clothes upon her head
That weigh a sow of lead,
Writhen in wonder wise,
After the Saracen's guise,
With a whim-wham,<10>
Knit with a trim-tram,<11>
Upon her brain-pan;
Like an Egyptian
Capped about:<12>
When she goeth out                                             80
Herself for to show,
She driveth down the dew
With a pair of heels
As broad as two wheels;
She hobbles as a goose
With her blanket hose
Over the fallow;
Her shoon smeared with tallow,
Greased upon dirt
That bawdeth her skirt.<13>                                    90

Primus Passus

And this comely dame,
I understand, her name
Is Elynour Rumming,
At home in her wonning;
And as men say
She dwelt in Surrey<14>
In a certain stead
Beside Leatherhead.
She is a tunnish gib;<15>
The devil and she be sib.                                     100

But to make up my tale,
She breweth nappy ale,
And maketh thereof port-sale<16>
To travellers, to tinkers,
To sweaters, to swinkers,<17>
And all good ale-drinkers,
That will nothing spare,
But drink till they stare
And bring themselves bare,
With, Now away the mare!<18>                                  110
And let us slay care,
As wise as an hare!

Come whoso will
To Elynour on the hill,
With Fill the cup, fill,<19>
And sit there by still,
Early and late:
Thither cometh Kate,
Cicely and Sarah,
With their legs bare,                                         120
And also their feet
Hardly full unsweet;
With their heels dagged,
Their kirtles all to-jagged,
Their smocks all to-ragged,
With titters and tatters,
Bring dishes and platters,
With all their might running
To Elynour Rumming
To have of her tunning:                                       130
She lendeth them on the same,
And thus beginneth the game.

Some wenches come unlaced,
Some housewives come unbraced,
With their naked paps,
That flips and flaps,
It wigs and it wags<20>
Like tawny saffron bags;
A sort of foul drabs
All scurvy with scabs:                                        140
Some be flybitten,
Some skewed as a kitten;
Some with a shoe-clout
Bind their heads about;
Some have no hair-lace,
Their locks about their face,
Their tresses untrussed
All full of unlust;
Some look strawry,
Some caury-maury;<21>                                         150
Full untidy tegs,<22>
Like rotten eggs.<23> 
Such a lewd sort
To Elynour resort
From tide to tide:
Abide, abide,
And to you shall be told
How her ale is sold
To Maud and to Mold.

Secundus Passus

Some have no money                                            160
That thither come-y,
For their ale to pay,
That is a shrewd array;
Elynour sweared, Nay,
Ye shall not bear away
My ale for nought,
By Him that me bought!<24>

With Hey, dog, hey,
Have these hogs away!
With Get me a staff,                                          170
The swine eat my draff!
Strike the hogs with a club,
They have drunk up my swilling-tub!
For, be there never so much press,
These swine go to the high dais,<25>
The sow with her pigs,
The boar his tail wrigs,
His rump also he frigs
Against the high bench!
With, Fo, there is a stench!                                  180
Gather up, thou wench;
Seest thou not what is fall?
Take up dirt and all,
And bear out of the hall:
God give it ill-preving
Cleanly as evil chieving!<26>

But let us turn plain,
There we left again.
For, as ill a patch<27> as that,
The hens run in the mash-vat;                                 190
For they go to roost
Straight over the ale-just,
And dung, when it comes,
In the ale-tuns.
Then Elynour taketh
The mash-bowl, and shaketh
The hens dung away,
And skimmeth it into a tray
Whereas the yeast is,
With her mangy fists:                                         200
And sometime she blends
The dung of her hens
And the ale together;
And sayeth, Gossip, come hither,
This ale shall be thicker,
And flower the more quicker;
For I may tell you
I learned it of a Jew,
When I began to brew,
And I have found it true;                                     210
Drink now while it is new;
An ye may it brook,
It shall make you look
Younger than ye be
Years two or three,
For ye may prove it by me;
Behold, she said, and see
How bright I am of blee!
Ich am not cast away,
That can my husband say,                                      220
When we kiss and play
In lust and in liking;<28>
He calleth me his whiting,<29>
His mulling and his miting,<30>
His nobs and his coney,<31>
His sweeting and his honey,
With Bass, my pretty bonny,
Thou art worth goods and money.
Thus make I my fellow fonny,<32>
Till that he dream and drony;                                 230
For, after all our sport,
Then will he rout and snort;
Then sweetly together we lie
As two pigs in a sty.

To cease meseemeth best,
And of this tale to rest,
And for to leave this letter,
Because it is no better,
And because it is no sweeter;
We will no further rhyme                                      240
Of it at this time;
But we will turn plain
Where we left again.

Tertius Passus

Instead of coin and money<33>
Some bring her a coney,
And some a pot with honey,
Some a salt, and some a spoon,
Some their hose, some their shoon;
Some run a good trot
With a skillet or a pot;                                      250
Some fill their pot full
Of good Lemster wool:
An housewife of trust,
When she is athirst,
Such a web can spin,
Her thrift is full thin.

Some go straight thither,
Be it slaty or slither:<34>
They hold the highway,
They care not what men say,                                   260
Be that as be may;
Some, loth to be espied,
Start in at the back-side
Over the hedge and pale,
And all for the good ale.

Some runne till they sweat,
Bring with them malt or wheat,
And Dame Elynour entreat
To birle them of the best.<35>

Then cometh another guest;                                    270
She sweareth by the rood of rest,<36>
Her lips are so dry,
Without drink she must die;
Therefore fill it by and by,
And have here a peck of rye.

Anon cometh another,
As dry as the other,
And with her doth bring
Meal, salt, or other thing,
Her harvest girdle, her wedding ring,                         280
To pay for her scot
As cometh to her lot.
One bringeth her husband's hood
Because the ale is good;
Another brought her his cap
To offer to the ale-tap,<37>
With flax and with tow;
And some brought sour dough
With, Hey, and with, Ho!
Sit we down a row,                                            290
And drink till we blow,
And pipe Tirly Tirlow!<38>

Some laid to pledge
Their hatchet and their wedge,
Their heckle and their reel,
Their rock, their spinning-wheel;<39>
And some went so narrow
They laid to pledge their wharrow,
Their ribskin <40> and their spindle,
Their needle and their thimble:                               300
Here was scant thrift
When they made such shift.

Their thirst was so great
They asked never for meat,
But Drink, still drink, 
And let the cat wink,<41>
Let us wash our gums
From the dry crumbs!

Quartus Passus

Some for very need
Laid down a skein of thread,                                  310
And some a skein of yarn;
Some brought from the barn
Both beans and peas;
Small chaffer doth ease
Sometime, now and then:
Another there was that ran
With a good brass-pan;
Her colour was full wan;
She ran in all the haste,<42>
Unbraced and unlaced;                                         320
Tawny, swart, and sallow
Like a cake of tallow;
I swear by all hallow<43>
It was a stale to take
The devil in a brake.<44>

And then came halting Joan,
And brought a gammon
Of bacon that was reasty:
But, Lord, as she was testy,
Angry as a waspy!<45>                                         330
She began to gane and gaspy,
And bade Elynour go bet,<46>
And fill in good met;
It was dear that was far-fet.

Another brought a spick
Of a bacon flick;
Her tongue was very quick,
But she spake somewhat thick.
Her fellow did stammer and stut,
But she was a foul slut,                                      340
For her mouth foamed
And her belly groaned:
Joan sayn she had eaten a fiest.<47>
By Christ, said she, thou liest,
I have as sweet a breath
As thou, with shameful death!<48>

Then Elynour said, Ye callets,
I shall break your pallets,
Without ye now cease!
And so was made the peace.<49>                                350
Then thither came drunken Alice;
And she was full of tales,
Of tidings in Wales,
And of Saint James in Gales,<50>
And of the Portingales;
With Lo, gossip, ywis,
Thus and thus it is:
There hath been great war
Between Temple Bar
And the Cross in Cheap,<51>                                   360
And there came an heap
Of mill-stones in a rout:
She speaketh thus in her snout,
Snivelling in her nose
As though she had the pose;<52>
Lo, here is an old tippet,
An ye will give me a sippet
Of your stale ale,
God send you good sale!
And as she was drinking                                       370
She fell in a winking
With a barley-hood,
She pissed where she stood;
Then began she to weep,
And forthwith fell on sleep.
Elynour took her up,
And blessed her with a cup
Of new ale in corns;<53>
Alice found therein no thorns,
But supped it up at once,                                     380
She found therein no bones.

Quintus Passus

Now in cometh another rabble;
First one with a ladle,
Another with a cradle,
And with a side-saddle:
And there began a fabble,
A clattering and a babble
Of a foolish filly
That had a foal with Willy,
With jaist you! and gup gilly!                                390
She could not lie stilly.

Then came in a jennet,
And swore, By Saint Bennet,
I drank not this sennight
A draught to my pay;
Elynour, I thee pray,
Of thine ale let us essay,
And have here a pilch of gray
I wear skins of coney,
That causeth I look so donny.<54>                             400

Another then did hitch her,
And brought a pottle pitcher,
A tunnel and a bottle,
But she had lost the stopple;
She cut off her shoe-sole,
And stopped therewith the hole.
Among all the blommer
Another brought a skommer,
A frying-pan, and a slice;
Elynour made the price                                        410
For good ale each whit.

Then start in mad Kit
That had little wit;
She seemed somedeal sick,
And brought a penny chick
To Dame Elynour,
For a draught of liquor.

Then Margery Milkduck<55>
Her kirtle she did uptuck
An inch above her knee<56>,                                   420
Her legs that ye might see;
But they were sturdy and stubbed,
Mighty pestles<57> and clubbed,
As fair and as white
As the foot of a kite:
She was somewhat foul,
Crook-necked like an owl;
And yet she brought her fees,
A cantle of Essex cheese,
Was well a foot thick                                         430
Full of maggots quick;
It was huge and great,
And mighty strong meat
For the devil to eat;
It was tart and punyete.

Another sort of sluts,
Some brought walnuts,
Some apples, some pears,
Some brought their clipping shears,
Some brought this and that,                                   440
Some brought I wot ne'er what;
Some brought their husband's hat,
Some puddings and links,
Some tripes that stinks.

But of all this throng
One came them among,
She seemed half a leech,
And began to preach
Of the Tuesday in the week
When the mare doth kick;                                      450
Of the virtue of an unset leek,<58>
Of her husband's breek;
With the feathers of a quail
She could to Bordeaux sail;
And with good ale barm
She could make a charm
To help withal a stitch.
She seemed to be a witch.

Another brought two goslings
That were noughty frostlings;<59>                             460
She brought them in a wallet,
She was a comely callet:
The goslings were untied;
Elynour began to chide,
They be wretchocks<60> thou hast brought,
They are sheer shaking nought!<61>

Sextus Passus

Maud Ruggy thither skipped:
She was ugly hipped,
And ugly thick lipped,
Like an onion sided,                                          470
Like tan leather hided:
She had her so guided
Between the cup and the wall,
That she was there withal
Into a palsy fall;
With that her head shaked,
And her hands quaked:
One's head would have ached
To see her naked:
She drank so of the dregs,                                    480
The dropsy was in her legs;
Her face glistering like glass;
All foggy fat she was;
She had also the gout
In all her joints about;
Her breath was sour and stale,
And smelled all of ale:
Such a bedfellow
Would make one cast his craw;
But yet for all that                                          490
She drank on the mash-vat.

There came an old ribibe;<62>
She halted of a kibe,<63>
And had broken her shin
At the threshold coming in,
And fell so wide open
That one might see her token,
The devil thereon be wroken!
What need all this be spoken?
She yelled like a calf:                                       500
Rise up, on God's half,<64>
Said Elynour Rumming,
I beshrew thee for thy coming!
And as she at her did pluck,
Quack, quack, said the duck
In that lampatram's<65> lap;
With Fie, cover thy shap
With some flip flap!
God give it ill hap,
Said Elynour for shame,                                       510
Like an honest dame.
Up she start, half lame,
And scantly could go
For pain and for woe.

In came another dant,
With a goose and a gant:
She had a wide weasand;
She was nothing pleasant;
Necked like an elephant;
It was a bullyfant,<66>                                       520
A greedy cormorant.

Another brought her garlic heads;
Another brought her beads
Of jet or of coal,
To offer to the ale pole;
Some brought a wimble,
Some brought a thimble,
Some brought a silk lace,
Some brought a pincase,
Some her husband's gown,                                      530
Some a pillow of down,
Some of the napery;
. . . . <67>
And all this shift they make
For the good ale sake.

A straw, said Belle, stand utter,<68>
For we have eggs and butter,
And of pigeons a pair.
. . . . <67>

Then start forth a fizgig,<69>
And she brought a boar pig;
The flesh thereof was rank,                                   540
And her breath strongly stank;
Yet, ere she went, she drank,
And got her great thank
Of Elynour for her ware,
That she thither bare
To pay for her share.
Now truly, to my thinking,
This is a solemn drinking.

Septimus Passus

Soft! quod one hight Sybil,
And let me with you bibble.                                   550
She sat down in the place,
With a sorry face
Whey-wormed about;
Garnished was her snout
With here and there a pustule,
Like a scabbed mussel.
This ale, said she, is noppy;
Let us sup and soppy
And not spill a droppy,
For, so mote I hoppy,                                         560
It cooleth well my croppy.

Dame Elynour, said she,
Have here is for me
A clout of London pins;
And with that she begins
The pot to her pluck
And drank a good-luck;
She swinged up a quart
At once for her part;
Her paunch was so puffed,                                     570
And so with ale stuffed,
Had she not hied apace,
She had defiled the place.

Then began the sport
Among that drunken sort:
Dame Elynour, said they,
Lend here a cock of hay,
To make all thing clean;
Ye wot well what we mean.

But, sir, among all                                           580
That sat in that hall
There was a prick-me-dainty
Sat like a sainty,
And began to painty
As though she would fainty:<70>
She made it as coy
As a lege de moy;<71>
She was not half so wise
As she was peevish nice.

She said never a word,                                        590
But rose from the board
And called for our dame,
Elynour by name.
We supposed, Iwis,
That she rose to piss;
But the very ground
Was for to compound
With Elynour in the spence,
To pay for her expense:
I have no penny nor groat                                     600
To pay, she said, God wot,
For washing of my throat,
But my beads of amber
Bear them to your chamber.
Then Elynour did them hide
Within her bed's side.

But some then sat right sad
That nothing had,
There of their own,
Neither gelt nor pawn:                                        610
Such were there many
That had not a penny,
But, when they should walk,
Were fain with a chalk
To score on the baulk,
Or score on the tail:
God give it ill hail!<72>
For my fingers itch;
I have written too much
Of this mad mumming                                           620
Of Elynour Rumming.
Thus endeth the geste
Of this worthy feast.

Quod Skelton, Laureate.

LAUREATI SKELTONIDIS IN DESPECTU MALIGNANTIUM DISTICHON<73>
A couplet by Skelton the Laureate, in despite of the evil-minded.

Quamvis insanis, marcescis quamvis inanis,
Invide, cantamus: haec loca plena jocis.<74>

Bien m'en souvient.<75.>.

Omnes foeminas, quae nimis bibulae sunt, vel quae
sordida labe squaloris, aut qua spurca foeditatis
macula, aut verbosa loquacitate notantur, poeta invitat
ad audiendum hunc libellum, &c..<76>

Ebria, squalida, sordida foemina, prodiga verbis,
Huc currat, properet, veniat! Sua gesta libellus
Iste volutabit: Paean sua plectra sonando
Materiam risus cantabit carmine rauco.<77>

Finis.

Quod Skelton, Laureate.



NOTES TO THE TUNNING OF ELYNOUR RUMMING.

1. On the title-page, and also on the last leaf of Rand's edition
of this poem, 1624, 4to, (reprinted, not with perfect accuracy, in
the Harleian Miscellany; see vol. i. 415. ed. Park) is an
imaginary portrait, of which the subjoined is a facsimile:

Illustration: Portrait of Elynour Rumming


"When Skelton wore the Laurel Crown,
My Ale put all the Ale-wives down."

George Steevens having heard that a copy of Rand's edition was in
the Library of Lincoln Cathedral, prevailed on the Dean to bring
it to London; and having made a drawing of the title-page, gave it
to Richardson the print-seller, who engraved and published it.
Steevens, soon after, contributed to the European Magazine for
May, 1794, vol. xxv. 334,- "Verses meant to have been subjoined
(with the following Motto) to a Copy from a scarce Portrait of
Elynour Rumming, lately published by Mr. Richardson, of Castle-
street, Leicester square.

Ne sit ancillae tibi amor pudori
Xanthia Phoceu! prius insolentem
Serva Briseis niveo colere
Movit Achillem.

Movit Ajacem Telamone natum
Forma captivm dominum Tecmessae;
Arsit Atrides medio in triumpho
Virgine rapta
HORACE.
("Phocian Xanthis, don't be ashamed of love for your serving-girl.
Once before, Briseis the Trojan slave with her snow-white skin
aroused angry Achilles.
Captive Tecmessa's loveliness troubled her master Ajax, the son of
Telamon: and Agamemnon, in his mid-triumph, burned for a stolen
girl." (A. S. Kline)

"Eleonora Rediviva."

To seek this nymph among the glorious dead,
Tir'd with his search on earth, is Gulston fled:-
Still for these charms enamour'd Musgrave sighs;
To clasp these beauties ardent Bindley dies;-
For these (while yet unstag'd to public view)
Impatient Brand o'er half the kingdom flew;-
These, while their bright ideas round him play,
From classic Weston force the Roman lay:-
Oft too, my Storer! heaven has heard thee swear,
Not Gallia's murder'd Queen was half so fair:-
'A new Europa!' cries the exulting Bull,
'My Granger now (I thank the gods) is full:'
Even Cracherode's self, whom passions rarely move,
At this soft shrine has deign'd to whisper love.-
Haste then, ye swains, who Rumming's form adore,
Possess your Elynour, and sigh no more.
W. R."

The Marquis of Bute told Dallaway that he gave twenty guineas for
the original engraving of Elynour: see Dallaway's Letheraeum,
1821, p. 6. Rand's edition opens with the following lines, which,
I need hardly observe, are by some rhymer of the day:

Skelton's Ghost.

To all tapsters and tiplers,
And all ale house vittlers,
Inn-keepers and cooks,
That for pot-sale looks,
And will not give measure,
But at your own pleasure,
Contrary to law,
Scant measure will draw
In pot and in can,
To cozen a man
Of his full quart a penny,
Of you there's too many:
For in King Harry's time,
When I made this rime
Of Elynour Rumming
With her good ale tunning,
Our pots were full quarted,
We were not thus thwarted
With froth-can and nick-pot
And such nimble quick shot,
That a dozen will score
For twelve pints and no more.
Full Winchester gage
We had in that age;
The Dutchman's strong beer
Was not hopped over here,
To us t'was unknown
Bare ale of our own
In a bowle we might bring
To welcome the king,
And his grace to beseech,
With, Wassall my Liege.
Nor did that time know
To puff and to blow
In a piece of white clay,
As you do at this day,
With fire and coal,
And a leaf in a hole;
As my ghost hath late seen,
As I walked between
Westminster Hall
And the church of Saint Paul,
And so through the city,
Where I saw and did pity
My countrymen's cases,
With fiery-smoke faces,
Sucking and drinking
A filthy weed stinking,
Was ne'er known before
Till the devil and the Moor
In th' Indies did meet,
And each other there greet
With a health they desire
Of stink, smoke, and fire.
But who e'er doth abhor it,
The city smokes for it;
Now full of fire-shops
And foul spitting chops,
So neesing and coughing,
That my ghost fell to scoffing,
And to myself said,
Here's filthy fumes made;
Good physick of force
To cure a sick horse.
Nor had we such slops,
And shag-hair on our tops:
At wearing long hair
King Harry would swear,
And gave a command
With speed out of hand
All heads should be polled,
As well young as old,
And his own was first so, 
Good ensample to show.
Y'are so out of fashion,
I know not our nation;
Your ruffs and your bands,
And your cuffs at your hands,
Your pipes and your smokes,
And your short curtail cloaks;
Scarfs, feathers, and swords,
And thin bodkin beards;
Your waists a span long,
Your knees with points hung,
Like morris-dance bells;
And many toys else,
Which much I distaste:
But Skelton's in haste.
My masters, farewell;
Read over my Nell,
And tell what you think
Of her and her drink: 
If she had brewed amiss,
I had never wrote this.

At the end of the poem is, from the same hand,

Skelton's Ghost to the Reader.

Thus, countrymen kind,
I pray let me find,
For this merry glee,
No hard censure to be.
King Henry the Eight
Had a good conceit
Of my merry value,
Though duncical plain
It now nothing fits
The time's nimble wits:
My laurel and I
Are both withered dry,
And you flourish green
In your work's daily scene,
That come from the press,
Well writ I confess;
But time will devour
Your poets as our,
And make them as dull
As my empty skull.

I give these. lines from the Harl. Miscel., the copy of Rand's ed.
which was lent to me by Mr. Heber, wanting the last leaf.

Concerning Elynour Rumming and the poem by which Skelton has
rendered her famous, Dallaway has the following remarks,-his
account of the circumstances which introduced Skelton to her
acquaintance being a mere hypothesis!! "When the Court of Henry
viii was frequently kept at the palace of Nonsuch (about six miles
distant), the laureate, with other courtiers, sometimes came to
Leatherhead for the amusement of fishing, in the river Mole; and
were made welcome at the cabaret of Elynour Rumming, whom Skelton
celebrated in an equivocal encomium, in a short [?-it consists of
623 lines-] poem, remarkable only for a very coarse jest, after a
manner peculiar to the author and the times in which he lived, but
which has been more frequently reprinted than his other works. The
gist or point of this satire had a noble origin, or there must be
an extraordinary coincidence of thought in the Beoni, or Topers, a
ludicrous effusion of the great Lorenzo de Medici, when a young
man. [*Note: Dallaway was led to this remark by the following
passage in Spence's Anecdotes, &c.; "Skelton's poems are all low
and bad: there's nothing in them that's worth reading.- P. [Mr.
Cleland, who was by, added, that the Tunning of Elynour Rumming,
in that author's works, was taken from a poem of Lorenzo de'
Medici's]." p. 173, ed. 1820.-"I Beoni," observes Mr. D'Israeli,
referring to Roscoe's Life of Lorenzo de' Medici, i. 290, "was
printed by the Giunti in 1568, and therefore this burlesque piece
could never have been known to Skelton." Amen. of Lit. ii. 79. ]

Her domicile, near the bridge, still exists. The annexed etching
was made from a drawing taken previously to late repairs, but it
still retains its first distinction as an ale-house."

[Illustration: Elynour Rumming's Ale-house]


"Some of her descendants occur in the parish register in the early
part of the last century." Letheraeum, 1821, pp. 4-6.

2. Tunning] When tunne you and God will: Comment brasserez vous,"
&c. Palsgrave, p. 759: and here tunning means-Brewing.

3. Tell you Ich'ill,
If that ye will
A while be still] Ich'ill, e. Ich wyll, I will. Compare Sir Gawain
and the Green Knight;

"An ye will a while be still,
I shall tell you how they wrought."
p. 74. Bann. ed

and the Prol. to King Alisaunder;

"If ye willen sit still,
Full fele I will you tell."
Weber's Met. Rom. i. 5.

4. gill] Equivalent here to girl-a familiar name for a female; as
in the proverb, "Every Jack must have his Gill:" supposed by some
etymologists to be an abbreviation of Julia, Juliana, or Gillian;
by Richardson (Dict. in v. ) to be a corruption of giglot.

5. Her nose somedeal hooked,
And camously crooked] - "Cammed, or short nosed. Simus." Prompt.
Parv. [ed. Way.] "A Camous nose, that is to say crooked upward as
the Morians [Moors]." Baret's Alvearie. "Camous. Flat." Tyrwhtt's
Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant. Tales. " Camoused. Flat, broad and
crooked; as applied to a nose, what we popularly call a snub-
nose." Nares's Gloss. Todd, quoting this passage of Skelton,
explains camously, awry. Johnson's Dict. in v.

6. goundy] i.e. sore running eyes. So Lydgate;

"A goundy eye is deceived soon,
That any colour chooseth by the moon."
Wars of Troy, B. ii. sig. H iii. ed. 1555.

7. With simper-the-cocket] So Heywood in his Dialogue;

"Upright as a candle standeth in a socket,
Stood she that day, so simper decocket."
Sig. F,-Works, ed. 1598.

and Jonson in his Masque, The Gipsies Metamorphosed;

"Lay by your wimbles,
Your boring for thimbles,
Or using your nimbles,
In diving the pockets,
And sounding the sockets
Of simper-the-cockets."
Works (by Gifford), vii. 376.

In a note on the latter passage, Whalley quotes from Cotgrave's
Dict.: "Coquine, a beggar-woman, also a cockney, simper de cocket,
nice thing." Gifford (ibid.) remarks, "Cocket was a fine species
of bread, as distinguished from common bread; hence, perhaps, the
name was given to an overstrained affectation of delicacy. To
simper at, or over, a thing, is to touch it as in scorn." Nares
(Gloss. in v. ) doubts (justly, I think) the connexion of simper-
the-cocket with cocket bread, and explains it, "quasi simpering
coquette," observing,that "one of Cotgrave's words in rendering
'coquette' is cocket." I may add, that in Gloss. of Prov. and Loc.
Words by Grose and Pegge, ed. 1839, is, "Cocket, brisk, apish,
pert," and "Simper, to mince one's words." ["An affected mealy-
mouthed girl." Cotgrave. "A simper-de-cocket, coquine, fantastica.
Howell, 1660. Halliwell.]

8. Her huke of Lincoln green,
It had been hers, I ween
More than forty year] "Huke, surquanie, froc." Palsgrave, p. 233.
"A loose kind of garment, of the cloak or mantle kind." Strutt's
Dress and Habits, &c. ii. 364. "Lincoln anciently dyed the best
green of England." Marg. note in Drayton's Polyolbion, Song 25. p.
111. ed. 1622. Compare a celebrated ballad;

"My cloak it was a very good cloak,
It hath been always true to the wear,
But now it is not worth a groat;
I have had it four and forty year."
Take thy old cloak about thee,-Percy's Rel. of A. E. P. i. 206.
ed. 1794.

9. Her kirtle Bristow red]-Bristow i.e. Bristol

"London hath scarlet, and Bristow pleasant red."
Barclay's Fourth Egloge, sig. C iiii. ed. 1570.

"At Bristow is the best water to dye red."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. V ii. ed. 1530.

10. whim-wham] i.e. something whimsically, fantastically devised.
The word is frequently applied to articles of female finery by our
early dramatists. In Ae Interlude of the Laying of a Ghost, we are
told
that the Ghost

"stole from piteous Abraham
Ane whorl and ane whim-wham."
-Laing's An. Pop. Poetry of Scotland.

Whim-wham is used by Gray, Works, iii. 123. ed. Mitford, and by
Lamb, Prose Works, ii. 142.

11. trim-tram] i.e. some trim, neat ornament, or pretty trifle. In
Weaver's Lusty Juventus, Hypocrisy, after enumerating a variety of
popish trumpery, adds

"And a hundred trim-trams mo."
Sig. B iiii. ed. Copland.

12. Capped about] Lant's ed. "Lapped"-rightly, perhaps.

13. bawdeth] i.e. fouls. "I Bawdy, or foul or soil with any filth,
Je souille." Palsgrave, p. 444. "The altar cloths, and the
vestments should be very clean, not bawdy, nor torn," &c. Hormanni
Vulgaria, sig. E iiii.

14. She dwelt in Surrey] Qy. "Dwells"?

15. tunnish gyb] The epithet tunnish is perhaps derived from her
occupation of tunning (see note 2 above), or perhaps it may allude
to her shape: gib is properly a male cat (see note 7 to Philip
Sparrow); but the term, as here, is sometimes applied to a woman;

"And give a thousand by-words to my name,
And call me Beldam, Gib, Witch, Night-mare, Trot."
Drayton's Epistle from Elinor Cobham to Duke Humphrey,-Poems, p.
175. ed. 1619. fol.

16. Port-sale] So Lant's ed. Ed. of Kyng and Marche, "pore sale."
Day's ed. "poore sale." Marshe's ed. "poorte sale." Rand's ed.
"pot-sale.". If port sale be the right reading, it must be used
here for-sale in general. "Port-sale, the sale of fish as soon as
it is brought into harbour; also an outcry or public sale of any
commodity." Kersey's Dict.

17. To sweaters, to swinkers] i.e. to those who sweat and labour
hard, - to labourers of various kinds.

"For we can neither swink nor sweat"
Piers Plowman, sig. I ii. ed. 1561.

18. Now away the mare] Skelton has the same expression in his
Magnificence, v. 1342. Compare The Friar and the Boy;

"Of no man he had no care,
But sung, hey how, away the mare."
Ritson's An. Pop. Poetry, p. 37.

and Jyl of Braintford's Testament, n. d.;

"Ah sirrah, marry, away the mare,
The devil give thee sorrow and care."
sig. B ii.

and A new Comedy &c. of the beauty & good properties of women, &c.
n. d.

"Tush, sir, be merry, let pass away the mare."
Sig. A ii.

The words are doubtless a portion of some song or ballad. In
Ravenscroft's Melismata, Musical Fancies, &c. 1611, is a song (No.
6) supposed to be sung by "Servants out of Service" who "are going
to the City to look for new;"

"Heigh ho, away the Mare,
Let us set aside all care,
If any man be disposed to try,
Lo here comes a lusty crew,
That are enforced to cry
A new Master, a new,"

19. With, Fill the cup, fill] So in The High Way to the Spital
House, by Copland, n. d.;

"With, Fill the pot, fill, and go fill me the can."
Utterson's Early Pop. Poet. ii. 15.

20. It wigs and it wags] Qy. "that . . . that"?

21. Some look strawry,
Some caury-maury] -strawry [newly come from the straw ?] I do not
remember to have met with elsewhere: caury-muwry (as a
substantive) occurs in Piers Plowman;

"[Envy] was as pale as a pellet; in the palsy he seemed
And clothed in Caurymaury," &c.
sig. F ii. ed. 1561.

22. tegs] A term found again in our author's first poem Against
Garnesche;

"Your windy shaking shanks, your long loathy legs
Brings you out of favour with all female tegs." 
v. 29.

In what sense Skelton uses teg, I cannot pretend to determine. In
Warwickshire and Leicestershire, a teg means a sheep of a year
old; and Ray gives, "A Tagge, a Sheep of the first Year, Suss."
Coll. Of Words, &c., p. 88, appended to Proverbs, ed. 1768.
[Palsgrave (p. 279) applies the term to a young deer: "teg, a
pricket saillant;" properly the doe in its second year.
Halliwell.] [Ex-classics editor's note: OED gives a fleece of a
year-old sheep as one sense of the word, which seems most likely
here]

23. Like rotten eggs] Lydgate in a satirical description of a lady
has

"Coloured like a rotten eey [i.e. egg]."
MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 156.

24. Him that me bought] i.e. Jesus Christ.

25. For, be there never so much press
These swine go to the high dais] Press, i.e. a great throng; Dais,
a word of doubtful etymology, generally means - a table of
estate,-the upper table raised on a platform more elevated than
the others. See Tyrwhitt's note on Cant. Tales, v. 372; and
Richardson's Dict. in v. Dais. It sometimes signifies a long bench
(see Jamieson's Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang. in v. Deis); and such
seems to be its meaning here, as in the fourth line after this
"the high bench" is mentioned.-Roy in his satire against Wolsey,
Read me, and be not wroth, &c., has imitated the present passage
of Skelton;

"For, be there never so great press,
They are set up at the high dais."
Harl. Miscell. ix. 51. ed. Park.

[To go to the high dais seems here to mean only to take the best
place].

26. God give it ill preving
Cleanly as evil chieving]-preving, i.e. proving; cleanly, i.e.
wholly

"And preachest on thy bench, with evil preve; "(i.e. evil may it
prove!)
Chaucer's Wife of Bath's Prol. v. 5829. ed. Tyr.

- evil chieving, i.e. evil ending, bad success.

"God give it evil chieving."
Roy's Read me, &c., Harl. Miscell. ix. 79. ed. Park.

See also Cock Lorelles boat, sig. B i., Towneley Myst. p. 108, and
Chaucer's Canon's Yeoman's Tale, v. 16693. ed. Tyr.

27. patch] I know not how to explain.

28. In lust and in liking] See note 6 to Divers Ballads and
Ditties Solacious.

29. whiting] So in our early dramas, whiting-mop (young whiting)
is a cant term for a nice young woman, a tender creature: see
Puttenham's Art of E. P., 1589. p. 184., and note in my ed. of
Webster's Works, iii. 37.

30. His mulling and his miting] Mulling-This term of endearment
occurs in the Coventry Mysteries, applied by one of the shepherds
to the infant Saviour;

"Though I be the last that take my leave,
Yet fair mulling take it not at no grieve."
MS. Cott. Vesp. D viii. fol. 91.

Compare also Hormanni Vulgaria: "This is a fair and sweet mulling.
Blandus est puerulus insigni festivitate." Sig. dd vii. ed. 1530.

Miting-Eds. of King and Marche and of Lant, "Nyting" Marshe's ed.
"Nittine". Rand's ed. mittine. In the Towneley Mysteries, one of
the shepherds says to the infant Saviour,

"Hail, so as I can, hail, pretty miting!"
p. 96.

and Jamieson gives miting as a fondling designation for a child,
Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang.-In our author's third poem Against
Garnesche, "miting"-(but used as a term of contempt)-is, here, the
rhyme to "witing."

Since writing the above note, I have met with a passage in the
comedy called Wily Beguiled which might be adduced in support of
the reading, "niting;" but I still think that "miting" is the true
one: the dramatist evidently recollected Skelton's poem, in the
ed. of which he had found "nytyng," "nittinge," or "nittine:"-
"Comely Peg, my nutting, my sweeting, my love, my dove, my honey,
my bonnie, my duck, my dear and my darling." Sig. C 4. ed. 1606.

31. His nobs and his coney] coney, i.e. rabbit. So in a song in The
Trial of Treasure, 1567;

"My mouse, my nobs, and coney sweet." Sig. E..

32. Thus make I my fellow fonny] fonny i.e. to be foolishly
amorous; compare-

"As freshly then thou shalt begin to fonne
And dote in love."
Chaucer's Court of Love,-Works, fol. 329. ed. 1602.

33. Instead of coin and money &c.] In Skelton's Works, 1736, the
passage is given thus

"Some instead of coin and money
Will come and bring her a coney
Or else a pot with honey
Some a knife and some a spoon
Some bring their hose, some their shoon.

34. slaty or slither] i.e. miry or slippery.

35. birle] The word birle-to pour out, furnish for, or part drink
among guests-(see Jamieson's Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang. in v. , and
Leyden's Gloss. to The Comp. of Scotland in v. Beir)-is not very
common in English literature: "the old God of wine called Bacchus
birling the wine." Hall's Chronicle, (Hen. viii.) fol. lxxiii. ed.
1548.

36. She sweared by the rood of rest]-rood, i.e. cross: see note 10
to Ware the Hawk.

"That is hardly said, man, by the rood of rest."
Barclay's First Egloge, sig. A iii. ed. 1570.

37. To offer to the ale tap] So in Jack Hare, a poem attributed to
Lydgate;

"And with his winnings he maketh his offering
At the ale stakes."
MS. Harl. 2251. fol. 14.

38. And pipe Tirly Tirlow] Compare a Song belonging to the
Tailors' and Shearmen's Pageant;

"They sang terly terlow."
Sharp's Diss. on Coventry Pag. And Myst., p. 114.

39. rock] i.e. distaff.-In a poem entitled Christ Cross me Speed.
A. B. C. Imprinted at London in Fleetstreet at the sign of the
Sun, by me Wynkyn de Worde, 4to. (which I know only from the
account of it in Typog. Antiq. 367. ed. Dibdin) are the following
lines;

"A great company of gossips, gathered on a rout,
Went to besiege an ale house round about;
Some brought a distaff & some a reel,
Some brought a shovel & some a pail,
Some brought drink & some a tankard,
And a gallon pot fast they drew thitherward," &c.

Though no edition of Elynour Rumming has come down to us printed
anterior to Christ Cross me Speed, the evident imitation of the
former in the passage just quoted, shows that it must have
existed.

40. ribskin] In Prompt. Parv., MS. Harl. 221, is "Rybbe skynn.
Melotula." In a MS. Catholicon in Lingua materna, dated 1483, I
find "Ribbing skin. nebrida pellicudia."-Does it mean (as Albert
Way, Esq. has obligingly suggested to me) a leather apron, used
during the operation of flax dressing? ["'Pellicula, Anglice a
ribskin; nebrida, idem est.' Nominale MS." Halliwell's Dict. See
also the same, in v. Trip-skin: "a piece of leather, worn on the
right-hand side of the petticoat by spinners with the rock, on
which the spindle plays, and the yarn is pressed by the hand of
the spinner. Forby."]

41. But drink, still drink,
And let the cat wink] So in The World and the Child, 1522;

"Manhood. Now let us drink at this comnaunt,
For that is courtesy.
Folly. Marry, master, ye shall have in haste
A ha, sirs, let the cat wink," &c.
Sig. C ii.

See also three epigrams by Heywood Of the Winking Cat,-Works, sig.
P 4. ed. 1598.

42. in all the haste] Compare

"Bulwarks were made in all the haste."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. z iii. ed. 1530.

"the right way
To London they took in all the haste."
Smith's XII Merry Jests of the Widow Edith, ed. 1573. sig. H iiii.

43. I swear by all hallow] i.e. by all the saints.

44. it was a stale to take
The devil in a brake] For "stare," which is the reading of all the
eds., I have substituted "stale"-i.e. lure, decoy. So in Marmyon's
Hollands Leaguer, 1632;

"And if my skill not fails me, her I'll make
A Stale, to take this Courtier in a brake."
Act ii. sc. 1. sig. D 3.

Compare too an epigram by Heywood;

"Take time when time cometh: are we set time to take ?
Beware time, in mean time, take not us in brake."
Works, sig. Q 3. ed. 1598.

and Cavendish's Life of Wolsey; "At last, as ye have heard here
before, how divers of the great estates and lords of the council
lay in a-wait with my Lady Anne Boleyn, to espy a convenient time
and occasion to take the cardinal in a brake." p. 147. ed. 1827.-
In our text, and in the passages just quoted, brake seems to be
used for trap: among its various significations, it means a strong
wooden frame for confining the feet of horses, preparatory to
their being shod; see Gifford's note on Jonson's Works, iii. 463.

45. Angry as a waspy] So Heywood;

"Now merry as a cricket, and by and by,
Angry as a wasp."
Dialogue, sig. C 4,-Works, ed. 1598.

46. go bet] apparently an old hunting cry, "go better," i.e.
faster. Compare;

"Arundel, quoth Bevis tho,
For my love go bet, go."
Sir Bevis of Hampton, p. 129. Maitl. ed.

"Go bet, quod he, and ask readily,
What corps is this," &c.
Chaucer's Pardoner's Tale, v. 12601. ed. Tyrwhitt,-

who observes that in the following lines of Chaucer's Legend of
Dido (288), go bet seems to be a term of the chase;

"The herd of harts founden is anon,
With hey, go bet, prick thou, let gone, let gone."

"He hath made me dance, maugre my head,
Among the thorns, hey go bet."
The Friar and the Boy,-An. Pop. Poetry,p. 46. ed. Ritson,-

who supposes the words to be the name of some old dance.

47. a fiest] So Hawes;

"She let no fart nor yet fiest truly."
The Pastime of pleasure, sig. Q viii. ed. 1555.

"A fiest, Tacitus flatus."
Withals's Dict. p. 343. ed. 1634.

48. with shameful death] Equivalent to-may you die with a shameful
death! see Tyrwhitt's Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant. Tales, in v. With.

49. And so was made the peace] In confirmation of the reading I
have given, compare Reynard the Fox: "Thus was the peace made by
Firapeel the Leopard, friendly and well." Sig e. 5 ed 1481.

50.Saint James in Gales] The body of Saint James the Great having,
according to the legend, been buried at Compostella in Galicia
(Gales), a church was built over it. Pilgrims flocked to the spot;
several popes having granted the same indulgences to those who
repaired to Compostella, as to those who visited Jerusalem. In The
Four P. P. by Heywood, the Palmer informs us that he has been

"At saint Cornelius, at saint James in Gales,
And at saint Winifred's well in Wales," &c.
Sig. A ii. ed. n. d.

51. the Cross in Cheap] Was originally erected in 1290 by Edward
I. at one of the resting places of the body of his beloved
Eleanor, in its progress from Herdeby, where she died, to
Westminster Abbey, where she was buried; and was adorned with her
image and arms. Of its being afterwards rebuilt,- of the conduits
that were added to it, &c. &c. an account will be found in Stow's
Survey, B. iii. 35. ed. 1720, and Sup. to Gent. Mag. for 1764,
vol. 34. 607. This structure was barbarously demolished in 1643,
as a monument of Popish superstition.

52. Snivelling in her nose,
As though she had the pose] pose-i.e a head cold. So Chaucer;

"he speaketh in his nose,
And sneezeth fast, and eke he hath the pose."
The Manciple's Prol. v. 17010. ed. Tyr.

See also The Reeve's Tale, v. 4149.

53. new ale in corns] i.e. ale just drawn off the malt. So in
Thersytes, n. d.;

"I will make thee drink worse than good ale in the corns."
p. 56. Rox. ed.

"New ale in corns. Cervisia cum recrementis"
Baret's Alvearie, in v. Ale.

54. donny] Richardson, Dict. in vv. Dun, Dunny, cites this line as
containing an example of the latter word,-rightly, perhaps, for
donne (dun) occurs in Skelton's Magnificence, v. 1002.-The common
people of Ireland, employ donny in the sense of-poor, mean-
looking, as "a donny creature; "also in the sense of-poorly, [so
in Lancashire,] as "How are you to-day?"-" Och ! but donny, very
donny." For this information I am indebted to the kindness of Miss
Edgeworth, who has used the word in one of her excellent tales.

55. Margery Milkduck] So again in our author's Magnificence;

"What, Margery Milk Duck, marmoset!"
v. 462.

Compare one of the Coventry Mysteries;

"Malkin Milkduck and fair Mabel."
MS. Cott. Vesp. D viii. fol. 74.

56. Her kirtle she did uptuck
An inch above her knee] So in our old ballad poetry;

"Then you must cut your gown of green,
An inch above your knee."
Child Waters,-Percy's Rel. of A. E. P. iii. 56. ed. 1794.

57. pestles] i.e. legs,-so called, perhaps, because the leg-bone
resembles a pestle used in a mortar. The expression "pestle of
pork "frequently occurs in our early writers; as in the following
passage concerning the tremendous appetite of Charlemagne; "When
he took his repast he was content with little bread, but as
touching the pittance, he ate at his repast a quarter of mutton,
or ii hens, or a great goose, or a great pestle of pork, or a
peacock, or a crane, or an hare all whole." Caxton's Life of
Charles the Great, &c., 1485. sig. b iii.

58. the virtue of an unset leek] "Unset leeks be of more virtue
than they that be set . . . praestant in medicina.("they are more
powerful as medicine") " Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. f ii. ed. 1530.

59. noughty frostlings] i.e. worthless things, stunted by frost.
In Suffolk, froslin is applied to any thing-a lamb, a gosling, a
chicken, an apple, &c., nipped, or pinched, or injured by frost:
see Moor's Suffolk Words, Appendix.

60. wretchocks] "The famous imp yet grew a wretchock; and though
for seven years together he was carefully carried at his mother's
back, rocked in a cradle of Welsh cheese, like a maggot, and there
fed with broken beer, and blown wine of the best daily, yet looks
as if he never saw his quinquennium. ('fifth year')" Jonson's
Masque, The Gipsies Metamorphosed,-Works, vii. 371. ed. Clifford,
who thus comments on the pas sage in his authoritative style: i.e.
pined away, instead of thriving. Whalley appears to have puzzled
himself sorely in this page, about a matter of very little
difficulty. In every large breed of domestic fowls, there is
usually a miserable little stunted creature, that forms a perfect
contrast to the growth and vivacity of the rest. This unfortunate
abortive, the goodwives, with whom it is an object of tenderness,
call a wrethcock; and this is all the mystery. Was Whalley
ignorant that what we now term chick, was once chocke and chooke?"
The fol. ed. of the Masque of Gipsies has "wretch-cock," which
Nares, who does not know what to make of' the word, observes
"would admit of an easy derivation from wretch and cock, meaning a
poor wretched fowl." Gloss. in v. [Perhaps wretchock is merely a
diminution of wretch.]

61. sheer shaking nought] i.e. sheer worthless. So again our
author in his Magnificence;

"From qui fuit aliquid to sheer shaking nought."
v. 1319.

62. an old ribibe] Chaucer, in The Friar's Tale, says,

"This Sompnour, waiting ever on his prey,
Rode forth to summon a widow, an old ribibe."
v. 6958. ed. Tyrwhitt,-

who says he cannot guess how this musical instrument came to be
put for an old woman, "unless perhaps from its shrillness." The
word so applied occurs also in Jonson's Devil is an Ass, act i.
sc. 1, where Gifford observes, "Ribibe, together with its synonym
rebeck, is merely a cant expression for an old woman. A ribibe,
the reader knows, is a rude kind of fiddle, and the allusion is
probably to the inharmonious nature of its sounds." Works, v. 8.

63. She halted of a kibe] i.e. She limped from a chap in the heel.
The following remedy is seriously proposed in The Country Farm,
and was no doubt applied by our ancestors: "For kibes on the
heels, make powder of old shoe soles burned, and of them with oil
of roses anoint the kibes; or else lay unto the kibes the rind of
a pomegranate boiled in wine." p. 83. ed. 1600.

64. on God's half] i.e. for God's sake: half, i.e. behalf, like
halben in German.

65. lampatrams] A word which I am unable to explain. [Ex-Classics
Editor's Note: This word is in the OED, with this line as the
quotation, and no definition! Lampaetra is the Latin word for a
lamprey.]

66. bullyfant] A mock derivation from bull, in imitation of
elephant.

67. The line which rhymes with the previous one has dropped out

68. A straw, said Belle, stand utter]-stand utter, i.e. stand more
out, back.

"Straw, quod the third, ye ben lewd and nice."
Chaucer's Canon's Yeoman's Tale, v. 16393. ed. Tyr.

Stand utter, fellow! where doest thou thy courtesy preve?"
The World and the Child, 1522. sig. B iv.

69. fizgig] "Trotiere: A raumpe, fisgig, fisking housewife,
ranging damsel, gadding or wandering flirt." Cotgrave's Dict.
"Fiz-gig, a wild flirting wench." Dialect of Craven, &c.

70. Sat like a sainty,
And began to painty
As though she would fainty] Sainty, i.e. saint: painty, i.e.
paint,-feign: fainty, i.e. faint. Compare our author's Colyn
Cloute;

"That counterfeits and paints
As they were very saints."
v. 922.

71. a lege de moy] So again in our author's Colyn Cloute;

"And how Parys of Troy
Danced a lege de moy,
Made lusty sport and joy
With dame Helen the queen."
v. 952.

I have not found elsewhere the term lege de moy. Mace, in his
Musick's Monument, 1676, mentions a Tattle de Moy,-"a New
Fashion'd Thing, much like a Seraband; only It has more of Conceit
in It, as (in a manner) speaking the word (Tattle de Moy)," &c. p.
129.

72. ill hail] i.e. ill health,-ill luck,-a common imprecation in
our old poetry;

"Ill hail, Alein, by God thou is a fonne."
Chaucer's Reeve's Tale, v. 4087. ed. Tyr.

See too Chester Mysteries (De Del. Noe), p. 27. Roxb. ed.

73. LAUREATI SKELTONIDIS IN DESPECTU MALIGNANTIUM DISTICHON.] " A
couplet in contempt of the wicked by Skelton the laureate poet."
(SP)

74. Quamvis insanis, marcescis quamvis inanis,
Invide, cantamus: haec loca plena jocis] " Jealous man, however
you waste away in your vanity, we sing; these places are full of
jests"(SP)

75. Bien m'en souvient.] "I remember it well."

76. Omnes foeminas &c.] "All women who are either fond of
drinking, or who bear the dirty stain of filth, or who have the
sordid blemish of squalor, or who are marked out by garrulous
loquacity, the poet invites to listen to this little satire." (SP)

77. Ebria, squalida, sordida foemina &c.] "Drunken, filthy,
sordid, gossiping woman, let her run here, let her hasten, let her
come; this little satire will willingly record her deeds: Apollo,
sounding his lyre, will sing the theme of laughter in a hoarse
song." (SP)



POEMS AGAINST GARNESCHE

SKELTON LAUREATE, DEFEND[ER], AGAINST M[ASTER] GARNESCHE,
CHALLENGER, ET CETERA

<1>

[These Poems against Garnesche (now for the first time printed)
are from a MS. in the Harleian Collection, 367, (fol. 101), which
is in many places scarcely legible, being written in a hand very
difficult to decipher, as well as being much injured by damp.]

SITH ye have me challenged, M[aster] Garnesche,
Rudely reviling me in the king's noble hall,
Such another challenger could no man wish,<2>
But if it were Sir Termagant<3> that tourneyed without nall;<4>
For Sir Frollo de Franko<5> was never half so tall.
But say me now, Sir Satrapas,<6> what authority ye have
In your challenge, Sir Chesten, to call me a knave?

What, have ye kithed you a knight,<7> Sir Douglas the Doughty,<8>
So currishly to beknave me in the king's place?<9>
Ye strong sturdy stallion, so stern and stouty,                10
Ye bear ye bold as Barabbas, or Sir Terry of Thrace;<10>
Ye girn grimly with your gums and with your grisly face.
But say me yet, Sir Satrapas, what authority ye have
In your challenge, Sir Chesten, to call me a knave?

Ye foul, fierce and fell, as Sir Ferumbras the freke,<11>
Sir captain of Catywade, catacombs of Cayre,<12>
Though ye be lusty as Sir Libius <13> lances to break,
Yet your countenance uncomely, your face is not fair:
For all your proud pranking, your pride may impair.
But say me yet, Sir Satrapas, what authority ye have           20
In your challenge, Sir Chesten, to call me a knave?

Of Mantrible the Bridge, Malchus the Morrion,<14>
Nor black Balthasar<15> with his basnet rough as a bear,
Nor Lycaon, that loathly lusk,<16> in mine opinion,
Nor no boar so bremly bristled is with hair,
As ye are bristled on the back for all your gay gear.
[But say me yet, Sir Satrapas, what authority ye have
In your challenge, Sir Chesten, to call me a knave?]

Your wind-shaken shanks, your long loathly legs,
Crooked as a cammock, and as a cow calfless,                   30
Brings you out of favour with all female tegs:
That Mistress Punt put you off, it was not all causeless;
At Orwell her haven<17> your anger was lawless.
[But say me yet, Sir Satrapas, what authority ye have
In your challenge, Sir Chesten, to call me a knave?]

I say, ye solemn Saracen, all black is your blee;
As a glede glowing,<18> your eyen glister as glass,
Rolling in your hollow head, ugly to see;
Your teeth tainted with tawny; your seemly snout doth pass,
Hooked as an hawk's beak, like Sir Thopas.<19>                 40
Boldly bend you to battle, and busk yourself to save:
Challenge yourself for a fool, call me no more knave!

By the King's most noble commandment.

SKELTON LAUREATE, DEFENDER, AGAINST M[ASTER] GARNESCHE,
CHALLENGER, WITH GREASY, GORBELLIED GODFREY<20> [ET] CETERA.

How may I your mockery meekly tolerate,
[Your] groaning, your grunting, your groining like a swine?<21>
[Your] pride is all to-peevish, your port importunate;
[You] manticore, ye malapert, ye can both wince and whine;
[Your] loathsome leer to look on, like a greased boot doth shine.
Ye capped Caiaphas copious, your paltock on your pate,
Though ye prate like proud Pilate, beware yet of checkmate.<22>

Whole is your brow that ye brake with Deu[ra]ndall<23> your own
sword;
Why hold ye on your cap, sir, then? your pardon is expired:
Ye hobble very homely before the king's board;                 10
Ye counter umwhile too captiously, and ere ye be desired;
Your moth-eaten mockish manners, they be all to-mired.
Ye capped Caiaphas copious, your paltock on your pate,
Though ye prate like proud Pilate, beware of checkmate.

O Gabionite of Gabion,<24> why do ye gane and gasp?
Huff a gallant<25> Garnesche, look on your comely corse!
Lusty Garnesche, like a louse, ye jet full like a jasp;<26>
As witless as a wild goose, ye have but small remorse
Me for to challenge that of your challenge maketh so little
force.<27>
Ye capped Caiaphas copious, your paltock on your pate,         20
Though ye prate like proud Pilate, beware of checkmate.

Sir Guy, Sir Gawain, Sir Cayus, for and Sir Oliver,<28>
Pyramus, nor Priamus<29> nor Sir Pyrrhus the proud,
In Arthur's ancient acts<30> nowhere is proved your peer;
The fashion of your phys'nomy the devil in a cloud;
Your heart is too haught, ywis, it will not be allowed.
Ye capped Caiaphas copious, your paltock on your pate,
Though ye prate like proud Pilate, beware of checkmate.

Ye ground you upon Godfrey,<20> that grisly gorgon's face,
Your standard, Sir Olifranke,<31> against me for to splay:     30
Baile, baile at you both, frantic fools! follow on the chase!
Come Garnesche, come Godfrey, with as many as ye may!
I advise you beware of this war, range you in array.
Ye capped Caiaphas copious, [your paltock on your pate,
Though ye prate like proud Pilate, beware of checkmate.]

Gup, gorbellied Godfrey, gup, Garnesche, gaudy fool!
To tourney or to taunt with me ye are too far to seek:
For these twain whipslovens call for a cuck-stool:
Thou manticore, ye marmoset, garnished like a Greek,
Wrangling, wayward, witless, wraw, and nothing meek.           40
Ye capped Caiaphas copious, your paltock on your pate,
Though ye prate like proud Pilate, beware of checkmate.

Myrres vous y,<32>
Look not too high.

By the King's most noble commandment.

SKELTON LAUREATE, DEFENDER, AGAINST LUSTY GARNESCHE, WELL-BESEEN
CHRISTOPHER,<33> CHALLENGER, ET CETERA.

I have your lewd letter received,
And well I have it perceived,
And your scribe<34> I have espied,
That your mad mind contrived.
Saving your usher's rod,
I cast me not to be odd
With neither of you twain:
Wherefore I write again
How the favour of your face
Is void of all good grace;                                     10
For all your carpet cushions,
Ye have knavish conditions.
Gup, marmoset, jaist ye, morel!
I am laureate, I am no lorel.
Lewdly your time ye spend
My living to reprehend;<35>
And will never intend
Your own lewdness to amend:
Your English lewdly ye sort,
And falsely ye me report.                                      20
Garnesche, ye gape too wide:
Your knavery I will not hide,
For to assuage your pride.

When ye were younger of age
Ye were a kitchen-page,
A dish-washer, a drivel,
In the pot your nose did snivel;<31>
Ye fried and ye broiled,
Ye roasted and ye boiled,
Ye roasted, like a fon,                                        30
A goose with the feet upon;
Ye sluffered up sauce
In my Lady Bruce's house.
Whereto should I write
Of such a greasy knight?
A bawdy dish-clout,
That bringeth the world about
With hafting and with polling,
With lying and controlling.

At Guines when ye were                                         40
But a slender spear,
Decked lewdly in your gear;
For when ye dwelt there,
Ye had a knavish coat
Was scantly worth a groat;
In dud frieze<37> ye were shrined
With better frieze lined;
The outside every day,
Ye might no better a way;
The inside ye did call                                         50
Your best gown festival.
Your drapery ye did want,
The ward with you was scant.
When ye cast a sheep's eye,
. . . . Mistress Andelby,<38>
. . . . Guines upon a gong,
. . . . sat somewhat too long;
. . . . her husband's head
. . . . mall of lead,
. . . . that ye there preached,                                60
To her love ye not reached:
Ye would have bussed her bum
So that she would have come
Unto your lousy den; 
But she of all men
Had you most in despite,
Ye lost her favour quite;
Your pilled-garlic head<39> 
Could occupy there no stead;<40>
She called you Sir Guy of Gaunt,<41>                           70
Nosed like an elephant,
A pickaxe or a twibill;
She said how ye did bridle,
Much like a dromedary;
Thus with you she did warray
With much matter more
That I keep in store.

Your breath is strong and quick;
Ye are an elder-stick;
Ye wot what I think;                                           80
At both ends ye stink.
Great danger for the king,
When his Grace is fasting,
His presence to approach:
It is to your reproach.
It falleth for no swine,
Nor souters, to drink wine,
Nor such a noddypole
A priest for to control.

Little wit in your scribe's noll,                              90
That scribbled your fond scroll,
Upon him for to take
Against me for to make,
Like a doctor dawpate,
A laureate poet for to rate.
Your terms are too gross,
Too far from the purpose,
To contaminate
And to violate
The dignity laureate.                                         100

Bold bayard, ye are too blind,<42>
And grow all out of kind,
To occupy so your mind;
For reason can I none find
Nor good rhyme in your matter;
I wonder that ye smatter,
So for a knave to clatter,
Ye would be called a maker;
And make much like Jake Raker;<43>
Ye are a comely craker,                                       110
Ye learned of some pie-baker.
Cast up your curious writing,
And your dirty inditing,
And your spiteful despiting,
For all is not worth a miting,
A mackerel nor a whiting:
Had ye gone with me to school
And occupied no better your tool,<44>
Ye should have couthed me a fool.

But now, gaudy, greasy Garnesche,                             120
Your face I wis to varnish
So surely it shall not tarnish.
Though a Saracen's head ye bear,
Rough and full of lousy hair,
As every man well seeth,
Full of great knavish teeth,
In a field of green peason,
Is rhyme yet out of reason;
Your wit is so geson,
Ye rail all out of season.                                    130

Your skin scabbed and scurvy,
Tawny, tanned, and shurvy;<45>
Now upon this heat
Rankly when ye sweat,
Men say ye will wax lousy,
Drunken, droopy, drowsy.
Your sword ye swear, I ween,
So trenchant and so keen,
Shall cut both white and green:<46>
Your folly is too great                                       140
The king's colours to threat.
Your breath it is so fell
And so puauntly doth smell,
And so heinously doth stink,
That neither pump nor sink
Doth savour half so sour
Against a stormy shower.
O ladies of bright colour,
Of beauty that beareth the flower,
When Garnesche cometh you among                               150
With his breath so strong,
Without ye have a confection
Against his poisoned infection,
Else with his stinking jaws
He will cause you cast your craws,
And make your stomach seek
Over the perch to prick.

Now, Garnesche, guard thy gums;
My serpentines and my guns
Against ye now I bend;                                        160
Thyself therefore defend.
Thou toad, thou scorpion,<47>
Thou bawdy babion,
Thou bear, thou bristled boar,
Thou Moorish manticore,
Thou rammish stinking goat,
Thou foul churlish parrot,
Thou grisly Gorgon gleimy,
Thou sweaty sloven seamy,
Thou morrion, thou maument,<48>                               170
Thou false stinking serpent,
Thou mockish marmoset,
I will not die in thy debt!<49>
Tyburn thou me assigned,
Where thou shouldst have been shrined;
The next halter there shall be
I bequeath it whole to thee;
Such pelfry thou hast packed,<50>
And so thyself o'er-watched
That there thou shouldst be racked,<51>                       180
If thou were meetly matched.

Ye may well be bedawed,<52>
Ye are a fool outlawed;
And for to tell the ground,
Pay Stokes his five pound.
I say, Sir Dalyrag,<53>
Ye bear you bold and brag
With other men's charge:
Ye cut your cloth too large:
Such polling pageants ye play,<54>                            190
To point you fresh and gay.

And he that scribbled your scrolls,<55>
I reckon you in my rolls
For ii drunken souls.
Read and learn ye may,
How old proverbs say,
That bird is not honest
That fouleth his own nest.<56>
If he wist what some wot,
The flesh basting of his coat                                 200
Was sowed with slender thread.
God send you well good speed,
With Dominus vobiscum!
Good Latin for Jack-a-Thrum,<57>
Till more matter may come.

By the King's most noble commandment.

DONUM LEAUREATI DISTICHON CONTRA GOLIARDUM GARNESCHE ET SCRIBAM
EIUS<58>

Tu, Garnesche, fatuus, fatuus tuus est mage scriba:
Qui sapuit puer, insanit vir, versus in hydram.<59>

SKELTON LAUREATE DEFENDER AGAINST LUSTY GARNESCHE WELL BESEEN
CHRISTOPHER <60> CHALLENGER, ET CETERA.

Garnesche, gorgon, ghastly grim,
I have received your second hyime.
Though ye can skill of large and long,<61>
Ye sing alway the cuckoo song: 
Ye rail, ye rhyme, with Hey, dog, hey!
Your churlish chanting is all one lay. <62>
Ye, sir, rail all in deformity:
Ye have not read the property
Of Nature's works, how they be
Mixed with some incommodity,                                   10
As proveth well in his Rhetorics old,
Cicero with his tongue of gold.<63>
That Nature wrought in you and me,
Irrevocable is her decree;
Waywardly wrought she hath in thee,
Behold thyself, and thou mayst see;
Thou shalt behold nowhere a worse,
Thy mirror may be the devil's arse.
With knave, sir knave, and knave again!
To call me knave, thou takest great pain:                      20
The proudest knave yet of us twain
Within thy skin he shall remain;
The starkest knave, and least good can,
Thou art called of every man;
The court, the country, village and town,
Saith from thy toe unto thy crown
Of all proud knaves thou bearest the bell,
Loathsome as Lucifer lowest in hell.<64>
On that side, on this side thou doth gaze,
And thinkest thyself Sir Piers de Brasy,<65>                   30
Thy caitiff's carcass coarse and crazy;
Much of thy manners I can blazy.

Of Lombardy George Hardyson,<66>
Thou would have scored his habergeon; 
That gentle George the Januay,<67>
Ye would have triced his trull away:
Such pageants<68> with your friends ye play,
With treachery ye them betray.
Garnesche, ye got of George with gaudery
Crimson velvet for your bawdry.                                40
Ye have a fantasy to Fenchurch Street,
With Lombards' lemans for to meet,
With Buss me, butting, pretty Cis!
Your loathsome lips love well to kiss,
Slavering like a slimy snail-
I would ye had kissed her on the tail!

Also not far from Bowgy Row,<69>
Ye pressed pertly to pluck a crow:
Ye lost your hold, unbend your bow,
Ye won nothing there but a mow;                                50
Ye won nothing there but a scorn;
She would not of it thou had sworn.
She said ye were coloured with coal-dust;
To dally with you she had no lust. 
She said your breath stank like a brock,
With Gup, Sir Guy,<70> ye got a mock
She swear with her ye should not deal,
For ye were smeary, like a seal,
And ye were hairy, like a calf;
She prayed you walk, on God's half! <71>                       60
And thus there ye lost your prey;
Get ye another where ye may.

Disparage ye mine ancestry?
Ye are disposed for to lie:
I say, thou fell and foul flesh-fly,
In this debate I thee ascry.
Thou claimest thee gentle, thou art a cur;
Heralds they know thy coat armour:
Though thou be a gentleman born,
Yet gentleness in thee is threadbare worn;                     70
Heralds from honour may thee divorce,
For harlots haunt thine hateful corse;
Ye bear out brothels like a bawd;
And get thereby a slender laud
Between the tapet and the wall<72>-
Fusty bawdias!<73> I say not all.
Of harlots to use such an harass,<74>
Ye breed moths in cloth of Arras.<75>

What aileth thee, ribald, on me to rave?
A king to me mine habit gave:                                  80
At Oxford, the university,
Advanced I was to that degree;
By whole consent of their senate,
I was made poet laureate.
To call me lorel ye are too lewd:
Lith and listen, all beshrewed!
Of the Muses nine, Calliope
Hath pointed me to rail on thee.
It seemeth not thy pilled pate
Against a poet laureate                                        90
To take upon thee for to scrive;
It comes thee better for to drive
A dung-cart or a tumbril
Than with my poems for to mell.

The honour of England I learned to spell, <76>
In dignity royal that doth excel.
Note and mark well this parcel:
I gave him drink of the sugared well
Of Helicon's waters crystalline,
Acquainting him with the Muses nine.                          100
It cometh thee well me to remord<77>
That creancer<78> was to thy sovereign lord:
It pleaseth that noble prince royal
Me as his master for to call
In his learning primordial.
Avaunt, ribald, thy tongue reclaim!<79>
Me to beknave thou art to blame;
Thy tongue untaught, with poison infect,
Without thou leave thou shalt be checked,<80>
And taken up in such a frame.                                 110
That all the world will spy your shame.
Avaunt, avaunt, thou sluggish . . .
And say poets no dis . . . 
It is for no bawdy knave
The dignity laureate for to have.

Thou callest me scold, thou callest me mad:
Though thou be pilled, thou art not sad.
Thou art frantic and lackest wit,
To rail with me that thee can hit.
Though it be now full-tide with thee,                         120
Yet there may fall such casualty,
Ere thou be ware, that in a throw
Thou mayest fall down and ebb full low.
Wherefore in wealth beware of woe,
For wealth will soon depart thee fro.
To know thyself if thou lack grace,
Learn or be lewd, I shrew thy face.

Thou sayest I called thee a peacock:
Thou lyest, I called thee a woodcock;
For thou hast a long snout,                                   130
A seemly nose and a stout,
Pricked like an unicorn:
I would some man's back ink-horn
Were thy nose spectacle-case;<81>
It would garnish well thy face.

Thou deemest my railing overthwart:
I rail to thee such as thou art.
If thou were acquainted with all
The famous poets satirical,
As Persius and Juvenal,                                       140
Horace and noble Martial,
If they were living this day,
Of thee wot I what they would say;
They would thee write, all with one stevin,
The foulest sloven under heaven,
Proud, peevish, lither, and lewd,
Malapert, meddler, nothing well-thewed,
Busy, brainless, to brawl and brag,
Witless, wayward, Sir Wrig-wrag,
Disdainous, double, full of deceit,                           150
Lying, spying by subtlety and sleight,
Fleering, flattering, false, and fickle,
Scornful and mocking over too mickle.

My time, I trow, I should but lese
To write to thee of tragedies,<82>
It is not meet for such a knave;
But now my process for to save,<83>
Inordinate pride will have a fall.
Presumptuous pride is all thine hope:
God guard thee, Garnesche, from the rope!                     160
Stop a tide, and be well ware
Ye be not caught in an hempen snare.
Harken thereto, ye Harvy Hafter,<84>
Pride goeth before and shame cometh after.

Thou writest, I should let thee go play:
Go play thee, Garnesche, garnished gay;
I care not what thou write or say,
I cannot let thee the knave to play,
To dance the hay or run the ray:<85>
Thy fond face can me not fray.
Take this for that, bear this in mind,
Of thy lewdness more is behind;
A ream of paper will not hold
Of thy lewdness that may be told.
My study might be better spent;
But for to serve the king's intent,
His noble pleasure and commandment,
Scribble thou, scribble thou, rail or write,
Write what thou wilt, I shall thee aquite.                    170

By the King's most noble commandment.



NOTES TO POEMS AGAINST GARNESCHE.

1. All the particulars concerning Garnesche which I have been able
to discover, will be found in the Account of Skelton and his
Writings.

2. wish] So MS. seems to read.

3. Sir Termagant] A very furious deity, whom the Crusaders and
romance-writers charged the Saracens with worshipping, though
there was certainly no such Saracenic divinity. Concerning the
name, see Gifford's note on Massinger's Works, ii. 125. ed. 1813,
and Nares's Gloss. in v. - So in The Flyting of Dunbar and
Kennedy, which in various minute particulars bears a strong
resemblance to the present pieces Against Garnesche;

"Termagantis temptis and Vespasius thy eame."
Dunbar's Poems, ii. 85. ed. Laing.

4. nall] Seems to be the reading of MS.-"nall" having been added,
instead of "alle," which is drawn through with the pen.

5. Sir Frollo de Franko] Was a Roman knight, governor of Gaul,
slain by King Arthur: see Geoffrey of Mon. 1, ix. cap. ii., The
Legend of King Arthur, Percy's Rel. of A. E. P. iii. 39. ed. 1794,
&c. &c.

6. Sir Satrapas] Neither with this, nor with the personage
mentioned in the next line, have I any acquaintance.

7. have ye kithed you a knight]-kithed, i.e. made known, shown.

"It kithed be his cognisance ane knight that he was."
Golagros and Gawane, p. 137, Sir Gawayne, &c. ed. Bann.

Garnesche had the dignity of knighthood; see Account of Skelton
and his Writings. In the heading, and first line, of this poem, he
is called Master; but knights were frequently so addressed. In
Cavendish's Life of Wolsey mention is made of "Sir William
Fitzwilliams, a knight," who is presently called "Master
Fitzwilliams," pp. 310, 311. ed. 1827, and of "Sir Walter Walshe,
knight," who is immediately after termed "Master Walshe," pp. 339,
340, and of "that worshipful knight Master Kingston," p. 374.

8. Sir Douglas the doughty] "The high courage of Douglas wan him
that addition of Doughty Douglas, which after grew to a Proverb."
Marg. Note on the description of the Battle of Shrewsbury, in
Drayton's Polyolbion, Song 22. p. 37. ed. 1622.

9. place] Might be read perhaps "palace."

10. Sir Terry of Thrace] I do not recollect any romance or history
in which a Sir Terry of that country is mentioned.

11. Sir Ferumbras the freke] freke (common in romance-poetry in
the sense of-man, warrior) is here, as the context shows,
equivalent to furious fellow: We have had the word before, The
Bowge of Court v. 187. Consult the analysis of the romance of Sir
Ferumbras in Ellis's Spec. of Met. Rom. ii. 356, and Caxton's Life
of Charles the Great, &c., 1485, for much about this Saracen,
called in the latter Fyerabras,-" a marvellous giant,"-"which was
vanquished by Oliver, and at the last baptised, and was after a
Saint in heaven." Sig. b viii.

12. Sir captain of Catywade, catacombs of Cayre] Cayre is Cairo;
but I am unable to explain the line. In the opening of Heywood's
Four P. P., the Palmer says, he has been at "the great God of
Katewade," alluding, as O. Gilchrist thinks, to Catwadebridge in
Sampford hundred in Suffolk, where there may have been a famous
chapel and rood; see Dodsley's Old Plays, i. 61. last ed.

13. Sir Lybyus] See note 84 to Philip Sparrow.

14. Of Mantrible the Bridge, Malchus the Morrion] morrion, i.e.
Moor; so in the third of these poems, Skelton calls Garnesche
"Thou morrion, thou maument," v. 170; so too in the Scottish
Treasurer's Accounts for 1501, "Peter the Morrion," Dunbar's
Poems, ii. 306. ed. Laing; and in a folio broadside, M. Harry
Whobals mon to M. Camell, &c. "(among the "flytings" of Churchyard
and Camell), "Some morrion boy to hold ye up." If the present
passage means that the Bridge was guarded by a Moor called
Malchus, I know not what authority Skelton followed. Concerning
the Bridge of Mantrible see the analysis of the romance of Sir
Ferumbras, Ellis's Spec. of Met. Rom. ii. 389; and Caxton's Life
of Charles the Great, &c., 1485, "Of the marvellous bridge of
Mantrible, of the tribute there paid for to pass over," &c., sig.
e. viii., and how "the strong bridge of Mantrible was won not
without great pain," sig. h viii.: it was kept by a giant, named
Algolufre in the former, and Galafre in the latter, who was slain
by the Frenchmen when the Bridge was won. In The Bruce of Barbour,
the hero reads to his followers "Romance of worthy Ferambras" and
how Charlemagne "won Mantrible and passed Flagot." B. ii. v. 832
sqq. ed. Jam. "The tale of the bridge of the mantrible" is
mentioned in The Complaint of Scotland, p. 98. ed. Leyden. Compare
also Don Quixote; "nor that [history] of Fierabras, with the 
Bridge of Mant[r]ible, which befell in Charlemagne's time, and is,
I swear, as true, as that it is day at this instant." P. i. B. iv.
c. xxii. p. 546., Shelton's trans., 1612.

15. black Balthasar with his basnet rough as a bear] Does black
Balthasar mean one of the Magi, or, as they were commonly called,
the Three Kings of Cologne? "the third, Balthasar, a black or
Moor, with a large spreading beard," &c. Festa Anglo-Romana, p. 7,
cited in Brand's Pop. Ant. i. 19 (note), ed. 1813: with his basnet
rough as a bear, i.e. with his cap (not helmet, it would seem)
rough as a bear.

16. Lycaon, that loathly lusk] "Here is a great knave i. a great
lither lusk, or a stout idle lubber." Palsgrave's Acolastus, 1540.
sig. X ii. "Lusk, a vile person, ribault, esclave, lourdault."
Palsgrave, Lesclar de la Lang. Fr. p. 241. The word is often used
as a term of reproach in general.

17. Orwell her haven] By Harwich.

18. As a glede glowing] i.e. glowing like a burning coal:-but qy.
did Skelton write "as a glede glowering?" i.e. staring like a
kite. He uses glede in this latter sense in Magnificence, v. 1059;
and in The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy (see note 3 above) we
find,-

      "hungry glede."
 . . . .
"Like to ane stark thief glowrand in ane tedder."
Dunbar's Poems, i. 70, 72. ed. Laing.

19. Hooked as an hawk's beak, like Sir Thopas] The allusion is to
Chaucer's Sire Thopas, who "had a seemly nose." v. 13659. ed. Tyr.

20. Godfrey] Concerning this person, who assisted Garnesche in his
compositions, and is afterwards called his scribe, I can give the
reader no information.

21. [Your] groaning, your grunting, your groining like a swine?]
The beginning of this line, and the next three lines, torn off in
MS. As to groining, Skelton has elsewhere;

"Hoining like hogs that groins and roots."
Against venomous tongues, v. 4

"The grunting and the groining of the groaning swine."
Garland of Laurel, v. 1376

To groin is explained to groan, to grunt, to growl; but perhaps
our author may have used it like the French "Groigner. To nuzzle,
or to root with the snout." Cotgrave's Dict.

22. Ye capped Caiaphas copious, your paltock on your pate,
Though ye prate like proud Pilate, beware yet of checkmate]
Copious is perhaps an allusion to some sort of cope, in which that
personage might have figured on the stage. The usual explanations
of paltock ("Paltock. Baltheus," Prompt. Parv. ; "a short garment
of the doublet kind," Strutt's Dress and Habits, &c. ii. 352) do
not seem to suit the present passage. In Palsgrave, p. 251, we
find "Paltock, a patch, palleteau; "and see what immediately
follows in this poem. Compare The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy
(see note 4 above):

"Thou irefull attercop, Pilate apostata."
. . . . . .
"Caiaphas thy faitour." 
Dunbar's Poems, ii. 85, 86. ed. Laing.

23. Deu[ra]ndall] Was the celebrated sword of Roland: see (among
other works which might be referred to) Caxton's Life of Charles
the Great, &c., 1485, "How Roland died holily after many martyrs
and orisons made to God full devoutly, and of the complaint made
for his sword durandal." Sig. i.

24. Gabionite of Gabion] So in his Replication against certain
young scholars, &c. Skelton calls them (in Latin) "Gabaonitae,"
The Gabionites were the inhabitants of Gabii, a nearby town, who
warred with the Romans early in their history.

25. Huff a gallant] [Huff seems to mean a swaggering, bullying
fellow.] Compare;

"Hof hof hof a frisch gallant."
Mary Magdalene,-An. Mysteries from the Digby MSS. p. 85. ed.
Abbotsf.

"Make room sirs and let us be merry,
With huffa galand, sing tirl on the berry." 
Interlude of the iiii Elements, n. d. sig. B ii.

In some Glossary, to which I have lost the reference, is "Huff, a
gallant "

26. Jasp] usually means a jewel, specifically the semiprecious
stone jasper, but here-does it mean wasp?

27. that of your challenge maketh so little force] i.e. that
maketh (make) so little matter of your challenge.

28. Sir Guy, Sir Gawain, Sir Cayus, for and Sir Olyvere]
Concerning the first two see Notes 80 and 81 to Philip Sparrow.
Cayus, or Kay, was the foster brother of King Arthur; see the
Morte d'Arthur, &c. &c.: for and [and also] is an expression
occasionally found in much later writers; see Middleton's Fair
Quarrel, act v. sc. 1., Works, iii. 544. ed. Dyce; and Beaumont
and Fletcher's Knight of the Burning Pestle,-

"For and the Squire of Damsels, as I take it."
Act ii. sc. 2. [sc. 3.]

a passage which the modern editors have most absurdly altered:
Oliver was one of the twelve peers of France.

29. Priamus] Perhaps the personage so named, who fought with
Gawain, and was afterwards made a knight of the Round Table; see
Morte d'Arthur, B. v. ch. x. xii. vol. i. 148 sqq. ed. Southey.

30. Arthur's ancient acts] An allusion, perhaps, more particularly
to the Morte d'Arthur; see its other title in note 83 to The
Garland of Laurel.

31. Sir Olifranke] Qy. a mistake of the transcriber for Sir
Olifaunte, the giant mentioned in Chaucer's Sir Thopas?

32. Myrres vous y] "Behold yourself therein" (Carl Woodring)

33. lusty Garnesche, well-beseen Christopher] Both these epithets
allude to his dress: "Lusty or fresh in apparel, frisque."
Palsgrave, p. 318; well beseen, [well looking.]-Compare Dunbar;

"Gif I be lusty in array,
Than love I paramours thay say
. . . .
Gif I be not well als beseen," &c.
Poems, i. 185. ed. Laing.

34. scribe] Means Godfrey, see note 20 above, and compare v. 90 of
the present.

35. My living to reprehend] Added to the MS. in a different hand.

36. your nose did snivel] So in The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy
(see note 3 above);

"Out! out! I shout, upon that snout that snivels."
Dunbar's Poems, ii. 86. ed. Laing.

37. dud frieze] i.e. coarse frieze: [a dudd was also a coarse
wrapper or dread-nought. Rags, or poor clothes in general, are
still called duds. See Way's Prompt. Parv. ]

38. A portion of the MS is torn off here.

39. pilled-garlic] [i.e. scalled-pilled is peeled.] Compare the
next poem Against Garnesche;

" Thou callest me scold, thou callest me mad:
Though thou be pilled, thou art not sad.
v. 117

Pilled-garlick was a term applied to a person whose hair had
fallen off by disease, see Todd's Johnson's Dict. in v.

40. occupy there no stead] i.e. avail nothing

41. Sir Guy of Gaunt] So our author again, in his Colyn Cloute;

"Avaunt, sir Guy of Gaunt."
v. 1157.

In The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy (which, as already shown,
strongly resembles the present pieces Against Garnesche in several
minute particulars) we find

"thou spreit of Guy."
Dunbar's Poems, ii. 72. ed. Laing.

and at p. 37 of the same vol., in The Droichis Part of the Play,
attributed to Dunbar,-

"I wait I am the spreit of Guy."

So too Sir D. Lyndsay in his Epistle to the King's Grace before
his Dream,-

"And sometime, like the grisly gaist of Guy."
Works, i. 187. ed. Chalmers,-

who explains it "the well-known Sir Guy of romance." But both
Dunbar and Lyndsay allude to a story concerning the ghost of a
person called Guy, an inhabitant of Alost. There is a Latin tract
on the subject, entitled De spiritu Guidonis, of which various
translations into English are extant in MS. One of these is now
before me, in verse, and consisting of 16 closely written 4to
pages: Here beginneth a notable matter and a great miracle done by
our Lord Jesus Christ and showed in the year of his incarnation
MCCCXXIII. [printed Latin tract now before me has MCCCXXIIII.] and
in the XVI day of December in the City of Aleste. Which miracle is
of a certain man that was called Guy and dead and after viii days
he appeared to his wife after the commandment of God of which
appearing she was afeared and often time ravished. Then she took
counsel and went to the friars of the same city and told the Prior
friar John Goly of this matter, &c. As Gaunt is the old name of
Ghent, and as Alost is about thirteen miles from that city,
perhaps the reader may be inclined to think,-what I should greatly
doubt,-that Skelton also alludes to the same story.

42. Bold bayard, ye are too blind] The proverbial expression, "as
bold as blind bayard,"-(bayard, properly a bay horse, but used for
a horse in general),-is very ancient, and of very frequent
occurrence in our early literature; its origin is not known:

"For blind bayard cast peril of nothing,
Till that he stumbling fall amid the lake."
Lydgate's Wars of Troy, B. v. sig. E e ii. ed. 1555.

43. Ye would be called a maker,
And make much like Jake Raker] i.e. You would be called a composer
of verses, or poet, and you compose much in the style of Jack
Raker. So again our.author;

"Set sophia aside, for every Jack Raker
And every mad meddler must now be a maker."
Speak, Parrot, v. 165

"He maketh us Jack Rakers;
He says we are but crakers," &c.
Why come ye not to Court, v. 270.

So too in the Comedy by Nicholas Udall, entitled Ralph Royster
Doyster;

"Of Songs and Ballads also he is a maker,
And that can he as finely do as Jack Raker."
Act ii. sc. 1. p. 27. (reprint.)

Mr. Collier (Hist. of Engl. Dram. Poet. ii. 448) speaks of Jack
Raker as if he really had existed: I rather think that he was an
imaginary person, whose name had become proverbial.

44. occupied no better your tool] i.e. used no better your tool,
pen.

45. Your skin scabbed and scurvy,
Tawny, tanned, and shurvy, &c.] The first line added to MS. in a
different hand. -shurvy, i.e., perhaps, "shrovy, squalid." Forby's
Vocab. of East Anglia: [probably only a softened form of scurvy.]
With this passage compare The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy (see
note 3 above)

"Fie! scowdered skin, thou art both skyre and skrumple.
. . . . .
Ane crabbed, scabbed, evil faced messan-tyke.
. . . . .
Thou lookest lousy."
Dunbar's Poems, ii. 70, 84, 72. ed. Laing.

46. Shall cut both white and green] an allusion to the dress which
our author appears to have worn as Laureate; see Account of
Skelton and his Writings.

47. scorpion] So in The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy "scorpion
venomous." Dunbar's Poems, ii. 75. ed. Laing.

48. maument] "Mawment. Idolum. Simulacrum." Prompt. Parv. ed.
1499. "Maument, Marmoset, poupee." Palsgrave, p. 244. "Mawment, a
puppet." Brockett's Gloss. of North Country Words.-(Mawmet, i.e.
Mahomet.)

49. I will not die in thy debt] Compare Cock Lorel's Boat;

If he call her callet, she calleth him knave again;
She shall not die in his debt." Sig. B i.

50. Such pelfry thou hast packed] I do not understand this line:
pelfry is, perhaps, pilfery; but does it not rather mean-petty
goods,-which Garnesche had packed, fraudulently got together?
"Much of their fish they do barter with English men, for meal,
laces, and shoes, and other pelfry." Borde's Book of knowledge,
sig. I, reprint. "Out of which country the said Scots fled, and
left much corn, butters, and other pelfry, behind them, which the
host had." Letter from Gray to Cromwell, State Papers, iii. 155,-
the Vocabulary to which renders pelfry, pillage-wrongly, I
believe. Dekker, describing "The Black Art "(or "Picking of
Locks"), tells us that "The gains gotten is Pelfry." The Bellman
of London, &c. sig. F 4. ed. 1608. Page 145. v. 179.

51. thou shouldst be racked] i.e. thou shouldst be stretched-have
thy neck stretched. So in The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy;

"For substance and gear thou has a widdy teuch
On Mont Falcone, about thy craig to rack." 
Dunbar's Poems, ii. 79. ed. Laing.
(widdy teugh = "tough rope made of osiers; thy craig to rack =
"thy neck to stretch")

52. be bedawed] Does it mean-be daunted? or, be called simple
fellow? see note 25 to The Bowge of Court.

53. Sir Dalyrag] So our author elsewhere;

"Let sir Wrigwrag wrestle with sir Dalyrag."
Speak, Parrot, v. 91.

"Adieu now, sir Wrig wrag,
Adieu, sir Dalyrag!"
The Doughty Duke of Albany v. 297

54. Such polling pageants ye play] i.e. Such plundering pageants,
thievish pranks, you play. The expression to "play a pageant "-to
play a part,-has before occurred, see note 19 to The Death of King
Edward IV. With the present passage compare: "This one pageant
hath stained all other honest deeds . . . flagitium." Hormanni
Vulgaria, sig. N v. ed. 1530. "That was a wily pageant . . .
commentum." Ibid. sig. N vi. "Thou gatest no worship by this
pageant . . facinore." Ibid. sig. P v. "He had thought to play me
a pageant: Il me cuyda donner la bont." Palsgrave, p. 658. "A
fellow which had renewed many of Robin Hood's Pageants." Fabyan's
Chron. vol. ii. fol. 533. ed. 1559. " After he had played all his
troublesome pageants," &c. Holinshed's Chron. (Hen. viii.) vol.
iii. 830. ed. 1587.

55. he that scribbled your scrolls] i.e. Godfrey; see note 20
above.

56. That bird is not honest
That fouleth his own nest] This proverb occurs in The Owl and the
Nightingale (a poem of the 12th century), p. 4. Rox. ed.

57. Jack-a-thrum] In his Magnificence, our author mentions "Jack-
a-thrum's bible," v. 1444, also in his Garland of Laurel, v. 209;
and in his Colyn Cloute he uses the expression,-

"As wyse as Tom-a-thrum."
v. 284.

where the MS. has "Jacke athrum"-Compare: "And thereto accords two
worthy preachers, Jack a Thrum and John Brest Bale." Burlesques,-
Reliquiae Antiquae (by Wright and Halliwell), i. 84.

58. DONUM LEAUREATI DISTICHON CONTRA GOLIARDUM GARNESCHE ET
SCRIBAM EIUS] "This couplet against Garnesche the goliard, and his
scribe, (is) a gift of the Laureate "-goliardum is equivalent,
probably, to buffoon, or ridiculous rhymer. ["The goliardi, in the
original sense of the word, appear to have been in the clerical
order somewhat the same class as the jongleurs and minstrels among
the laity, riotous and unthrifty scholars, who attended on the
tables of the richer ecclesiastics, and gained their living and
clothing by practising the profession of buffoons and jesters. The
name appears to have originated towards the end of the twelfth
century; and, in the documents of that time and of the next
century, is always connected with the clerical order." Wright,
Poems of Walter Mapes, p. x.] See Du Cange's Gloss. in v.,
Tyrwhitt's note on Chaucer's Cant. Tales, v. 562, and Roquefort's
Gloss. in v. Goliard.

59. Tu, Garnesche, fatuus, fatuus tuus est mage scriba:
Qui sapuit puer, insanit vir, versus in hydram.] "You, Garnesche,
are a fool, your scribe a greater fool; [He] who was wise as a
boy, is mad as a man, changed into a serpent.

60. lusty Garnesche well beseen Christopher] See note 33 above

61. Though ye can skill of large and long] i.e. Though you be
skilled in large and long; see note 10 to Against a Comely
Custron.

62. Ye sing alway the cuckoo song:
Ye rail, ye rhyme, with Hey, dog, hey!
Your churlish chanting is all one lay.] one lay, i.e. one strain.
So Lydgate;

"The cuckoo sing can then but one lay."
The Churl and the Bird,-MS. Harl. 116. fol. 151.

63. Cicero with his tongue of gold] Side note here: Observa
prologium libri secundi in veteri Rhetorica Ciceronis. Incipit
autem sc.g. Crotoniati quondam cum florerent omnibus copiis, et
cetera. ("See the prologue to the second book of old Cicero's
Rhetoric [i.e. De Inventione]. It begins 'The men of Croton, when
they were flourishing with every kind of riches, &c.'"). So Dunbar
speaking of Homer and Tully;

"Your aureate tongues both ben all too light," &c.
Poems, i. 13. ed. Laing.

64. Loathsome as Lucifer] So in The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy,
"Lucifer's laid." Dunbar's Poems, ii. 75. ed. Laing.

65. Sir Piers de Brasy] i.e. Pierre de Brézé, grand-seneschal of
Anjou, Poitou, and Normandy, and a distinguished warrior during
the reigns of Charles vii. and Lewis xi.: he fell at the battle of
Montlhéry in 1465.

66. George Hardyson] Perhaps the "George Ardeson "who is several
times mentioned in the unpublished Books of King's Payments Temp.
Hen. vii. and viii., preserved in the Chapter-House, Westminster:
one entry concerning him is as follows;

xxiii. of Hen. vii.-George Ardeson and Dominick Sall are bounden
in an obligation to pay for the licence of cccl butts of malmsey
vi.s viii.d for every butt within iii months next after they shall
be laid upon land - cxvi li. xii. s

67. the Januay] i.e. the Geneose. "The Jannays .... Genuenses."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. k iii. ed. 1530.

68. pageants] i.e. tricks. See note 54 above.

69. Bowgy row] i.e. Budge Row: "This Ward [Cordwainers Street
Ward] beginneth in the East, on the West side of Walbrooke, and
runneth West, through Budge Row (a street so called of the Budge
Fur, and of Skinners dwelling there)," &c. Stow's Survey, B. 15.
ed. 1720.

70. Gup, Sir Guy] See note 11 to Divers Ballads and Ditties
Solacious, and note 41 above.

71. on God's half] See note 64 to Elynour Rumming

72. Between the tapet and the wall] A line which occurs again in
our author's Magnificence, v. 1249.

73. Fusty bawdyas] An expression used again by Skelton in his
Garland of Laurel;

Foo, fusty bawdyas some smelled of the smoke."
v. 639

It occurs in the metrical tale The King and the Hermit;

"When the cope comes into the place, 
Canst thou say fusty baudyas,
And think it in your thought?
And you shall hear a totted friar
Say strike pantnere,
And in ye [the] cope leave right nought."
Brit. Bibliogr. iv. 90.

and several times after, in the same poem. [Apparently, a kind of
drinking strophe. See in Ivanhoe, by Walter Scott: "The one toper
says fusty baudias, to which the other is obliged to reply, strike
pantnere, and the Friar passes many jests on the King's want of
memory.]

74. harras] Equivalent to-collection. "Harras, a race; horses and
mares kept only for breed." COTG. Way's Prompt. Parv.

75. cloth of Arras] i.e. tapestry; so called from Arras in Artois,
where the chief manufacture of such hangings was.

76. The honour of England] i.e. Henry the Eighth. Learned i.e.
taught.

77. remord] Fr. "Remordre. To bite again; also, to carpe at, or
find fault with." Cotgrave's Dict. The word is frequently used by
Skelton (see, for instance, Unto Divers People That Remord This
Rhyming) where he introduces it with other terms nearly
synonymous,-"reprehending" and "rebuking").

78. creancer] i.e. tutor: see Account of Skelton and his
Writings.-Erasmus in his Paraph. in Epist. Pauli ad Galat. cap. 4.
v. 2,-Opp. vii. 956. ed. 1703-6, has these words; "sed metu
cohibetur, sed alieno arbitrio ducitur, sub tutoribus et actoribus
agens," &c.: which are thus rendered in The Paraphrase of Erasmus
upon the New Testament, vol. ii. fol xiii. ed. 1548-9; "but is
kept under with fear, and ruled as other men will, passing that
time under creancers and governors," &c. (Fr. creanser.)

79. ribald] MS. seems to have "rylode."

80. Without thou leave &c.] In the MS. the latter part of this
line, and the concluding portions of the next two lines, are so
injured by stains that I can only guess at the words. The endings
of the third and fourth lines are illegible.

81. I would some man's back ink horn
Were thy nose spectacle case] Compare our author's poem Against
Dundas, v. 37. and Bale's King John, p. 35. Camden ed.

82. tragedies] Skelton does not mean here dramatic pieces: compare
his piece Against the Scots, v. 72. So Lydgate's celebrated poem,
The TRAGEDIES, gathered by John Bochas, of all such Princes as
fell from their estates, &c.

83. my process for to save] process, i.e. story; so our author in
his Why come ye not to Court;

"Then, our process for to stable."
v. 533.

84. Harvy Hafter] See note 14 to The Bowge of Court.

85. hay . . . ray] Names of dances, the latter less frequently
mentioned than the former:

"I can dance the ray, I can both pipe and sing." 
Barclay's First Egloge, sig. A ii. ed. 1570.



AGAINST VENOMOUS TONGUES
AGAINST VENOMOUS TONGUES ENPOISONED WITH SLANDER AND FALSE
DETRACTIONS

[From Marsh's ed. Of Skelton's Works, 1568.]

SKELTON LAUREATE,
ORATORIS REGIUS TERTIUS<1>

Quid detur tibi, aut quid apponatur tibi ad linguam dolosam?<2>

Deus destruet te in finem; evellet te, et emigrabit te de
tabernacula tuo, et radicem tuam de terra viventium.<3>


All matters well pondered and well to be regarded,
How should a false lying tongue then be rewarded?
Such tongues should be torn out by the hard roots,
Hoining<4> like hogges that groins and roots.

Dilexisti omnia verba praecipitationis, lingua dolosa.Ubi s,
&c.<5>

For, as I have read in volumes old,
A false lying tongue is hard to withhold;
A slanderous tongue, a tongue of a scold,
Worketh more mischief than can be told;
That, if I wist not to be controlled,
Yet somewhat to say I dare well be bold,                       10
How some delight for to lie thick and threefold,

Ad sannam hominem redigit comice et graphice.<6>

For ye said, that he said, that I said, wot ye what?
I made, he said, a windmill of an old mat:
If there be none other matter but that
Then ye may commend me to gentle Cockwat.

Hic notat purpuraria arte intextas literas Romanas in amictibus
post ambulonum ante et retro.<7>

For before on your breast, and behind on your back,
In Roman letters I never found lack;<8>
In your cross row nor Christ cross you speed,<9>
Your Paternoster, your Ave, nor your Creed.
Whosoever that tale unto you told,                             20
He saith untruly, to say that I would
Control the cognisance of noble men
Either by language or with my pen.

Paedagogium meum de sublimiori Minerva constat esse: ergo,
etc.<10.>

My school is more solemn and somewhat more haut
Than to be found in any such fault.

Paedagogium meum male sanos maledicos sibilis complosisque manibus
explodit, &c. <11.>

My schools are not for unthrifts untaught,
For frantic faitours half mad and half straught; 
But my learning is of another degree
To taunt them like lidderons, lewd as they be.

Laxent ergo antennam elationis suae inflatem vento vanitatis. li.
ille, &c.<12>

For though some be lither, and list for to rail,               30
Yet to lie upon me they cannot prevail:
Then let them vale a bonnet of their proud sail,<13>
And of their taunting toys rest with ill-hail.

Nobilitati ignobilis cedat vilitas, etc.<14>

There is no noble man will judge in me
Any such folly to rest or to be:
I care much the less whatever they say,
For tongues untied be running astray;
But yet I may say safely, so many well-lettered,
Embroidered, enlaced together, and fettered,
And so little learning, so lewdly allowed,                     40
What fault find ye herein but may be avowed?
But ye are so full of vertibility,
And of frantic folability,
And of melancholy mutability,
That ye would coerce and enforce me
Nothing to write, but hey the guy of three,<15>
And I to suffer you lewdly to lie
Of me with your language full of villany!

Sicut novacula acuta fecisti dolum. Ubi s.<16>

Malicious tongues, though they have no bones,                  50
Are sharper than swords, sturdier than stones.

Lege Philostratum de vita Tyanaei.<17>

Sharper than razors that shave and cut throates,
More stinging than scorpions that stung Pharaotis.<18>

Venenum aspidum sub labiis eorum.Ps. <19>

More venomous and much more virulent
Than any poisoned toad or any serpent.

Quid peregrinis egemus exemplis? ad domestica recurramus, &c. li.
ille.<20>

Such tongues unhappy hath made great division
In realms, in cities, by such false abusion;
Of false fickle tongues such cloaked collusion
Hath brought noble princes to extreme confusion.

Quicquid loquantur, ut effeminantur, ita effantur, &c.<21>

Sometime women were put in great blame,                        60
Men said they could not their tongues atame;
But men take upon them now all the shame,
With scolding and slandering make their tongues lame.

Novarum rerum cupidissimi, captatores, delatores, adulatores,
invigilatores, deliratores, etc., id genus li. ille.<22>

For men be now trattlers and tellers of tales;
What tidings at Tottenham, what news in Wales,
What ships are sailing to Scalis Malis?<23>
And all is not worth a couple of nut-shells:
But leering and lurking here and there like spies;
The devil tear their tongues and pick out their eyes!
Then run they with lesings and blow them about,                70
With, He wrote such a bill without a doubt;
With, I can tell you what such a man said;
An you knew all, ye would be ill-apayed.

De more vulpine, gannientes ad aurem, fictas fabellas fabricant,
il. ille. <24> 

Inauspicatum, male ominatum, infortunatum se fateatur habuisse
horoscopum, quicunque maledixerit vati Pieria, S[keltonidi]
L[aureato], &c.<25>

But if that I knew what his name hight,
For clattering of me I would him soon quite;
For his false lying, of that I spake never,
I could make him shortly repent him for ever:
Although he made it never so tough,<26>
He might be sure to have shame enough.

Cerberus horrendo barathri latrando sub antro
Te rodatque voret, lingua dolosa, precor.<27>

A false double tongue is more fierce and fell                  80
Than Cerberus the cur couching in the kennel of hell;
Whereof hereafter I think for to write,
Of false double tongues in the despite.

Recipit se scripturum opus sanctum, laudabile, acceptabile,
memorabileque, et nimis honorificandum.<28>.

Disperdat Dominus universa labia dolosa et linguam
magniloquam!<29>



NOTES TO AGAINST VENOMOUS TONGUES

1. TERTIUS] A misprint: qy. Versus?

2. Quid detur tibi, aut quid apponatur tibi ad linguam dolosam?]
"What shall be given to thee, or what shall be added to thee, to a
deceitful tongue? " Ps. 119.3

3. Deus destruet te in finem; evellet te, et emigrabit te de
tabernacula tuo, et radicem tuam de terra viventium.] "God will
destroy you in the end; pluck thee out, and remove thee from thy
dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living." Ps
51. 7.

4. Hoining] "Hoigner. To grumble, mutter, murmure; to repine;
also, to whine as a child or dog." Cotgrave's Dict. "Hoi, a word
used in driving hogs," says Minsheu; who proceeds to derive it "
from Gr. Koi, quod est imitatio vocis porcellorum." ("which is an
imitation of the voices of pigs"). Guide into Tongues.

5. Dilexisti omnia verba praecipitationis, lingua dolosa] "Thou 
hast loved all the words of ruin, O deceitful tongue." Ps. 51. 6.

6. Ad sannam hominem redigit comice et graphice] "He brings a man
to mockery, derisively and cunningly."(PH)

7. Hic notat purpuraria arte intextas literas Romanas in amictibus
post ambulonum ante et retro] "Here he refers to Roman letters
artfully written in purple on the front and back of their gowns."

8. lack] i.e. fault, blame.

9. In your cross row nor Christ cross you speed]-cross row, i.e.
alphabet; so called, it is commonly said, because a cross was
prefixed to it, or perhaps because it was written in the form of a
cross. See Nares's Gloss. in v. Christ-cross. [Christ cross me
speed, seems to have been the beginning of an early school lesson.
Such a lesson preserved in MS. Rawl. 1032, commences, "Christ
cross me speede in all my work." Halliwell, Dict.]

"How long ago learned ye Christ cross me speed?" 
Lydgate's Prohemy of a marriage, &c.,- MS. Harl. 372. fol. 50.

In The Book of Courtesy we find;

"If that thou be a young infant,
And think thee schools for to haunt,
This lesson shall thy master thee mark,
Cross Christ thee speed in all thy work."
The sec. Book, p. 7. (printed for the Percy Society.)

and see title of a poem cited in note 39 to The Tunning of Elynour
Rumming

10. Paedagogium meum de sublimiori Minerva constat esse: ergo,
etc.] "My school is steadfast in upholding the most sublime
Goddess Mineva; therefore &c."

11. Paedagogium meum male sanos maledicos sibilis complosisque
manibus explodit] "My school beats off the curses of the evil with
hissing and flogging."

12. Laxent ergo antennam elationis suae inflatem vento vanitatis
"Therefore let them relax their sail puffed up with the winds of
vanity."

13. vale a bonnet of their proud sail] vale-to lower sail: bonnet
here means an additional piece of canvas laced to the foot or top
of a sail to catch more wind; the sense is "let them lower their
sails a little."

14. Nobilitati ignobilis cedat vilitas] "Those who are noble pay
no attention to the abuse of the ignoble."

15. hay the guy of three] Perhaps an allusion to the dance called
heydeguies (a word variously spelt).

16. Sicut novacula acuta fecisti dolum.] "As a sharp razor, thou
hast wrought deceit" Ps. 51.4

17. Lege Philostratum de vita Tyanaei.] Read Philostratus' Life of
Apollonius of Tyana.

18. Pharaotis] i.e. (I suppose) Pharaoh.

19. Venenum aspidum sub labiis eorum] "The poison of asps is under
their lips." Ps. 13.3.

20. Quid peregrinis egemus exemplis? ad domestica recurramus,
etc.] "Why do we need foreign examples?-let us revert to our own
country" (PH)

21. Quicquid loquantur, ut effeminantur, ita effantur, etc.]
"Whatever they say, they chatter like women." (PH)

22. Novarum rerum cupidissimi, captatores, delatores, adulatores,
invigilatores, deliratores] "Greedy of novelty, legacy-hunters,
informers, flatterers, spies, madmen."(PH)

23. Scalis Malis] i.e. Cadiz. "The towns men of Caleis, or Caleis
males, suddenly rung their common bell," &c. Hall's Chronicle
(Hen. viii.). fol. xiii, ed. 1548. "His fortunatest piece I esteem
the taking of Cadiz Malez." A Parallel of the Earl of Essex and
the Duke of Buckingham, - Reliquiae Wottonianae, p. 177. ed. 1672.

24. De more vulpine, gannientes ad aurem, fictas fabellas
fabricant,] "Wolfishly, snarling in the ear, they frame their
false fables." (PH)

25. Inauspicatum, male ominatum, infortunatum se fateatur habuisse
horoscopum, quicunque maledixerit vati Pieria, Skeltonidi
Laureato.] "Whoever has spoken ill of the Pierian poet, Skelton
the Laureate, let him confess that he has an inauspicious, ill-
omened horoscope." (PH

26. Although he made it never so tough] The expression, to make it
tough, i.e. to make difficulties, occurs frequently, and with
several shades of meaning, in our early writers; see R. of
Gloucester's Chronicle, p. 510. ed. Hearne, and the various
passages cited in Tyrwhitt's Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant. Tales in v.
Tough. Palsgrave has "I Make it tough, I make it coy, as maidens
do, or persons that be strange if they be asked a question." p.
624.

27. Cerberus horrendo barathri latrando sub antro Te rodatque
voret, lingua dolosa, precor. "I pray that Cerberus, with horrid
barking beneath the cave of the abyss, may bite you and devour
you, deceitful tongue." (PH)

28. Recipit se scripturum opus sanctum, laudabile, acceptabile,
memorabileque, et nimis honorificandum.] "He undertakes to write a 
book holy, laudable, acceptable, memorable and altogether
honourable." (PH)

29. Disperdat Dominus universa labia dolosa et linguam
magniloquam] "May God destroy all deceitful lips and boasting
tongues." (PH)



ON TIME

[This and the next three poems are from the ed. by King and Marche
of Certain Books compiled by Master Skelton, n.d., collated with
the same work, ed. Day, n.d., and ed. Lant, and with Marshe's ed.
of Skelton's Works, 1568. I may here notice that in those eds. the
present piece is preceded by a copy of verses, "All noble men of
this take heed," &c., which will be given afterwards, before Why
Come ye not to Court? where it is repeated in all the eds. ]

YE may hear now, in this rime,
How every thing must have a time.

Time is a thing that no man may resist;
Time is transitory and irrevocable;
Who sayeth the contrary, time passeth as him list;
Time must be taken in season convenable:
Take time when time is, for time is aye mutable;
All thing hath time, who can for it provide;
Bide for time who will, for time will no man bide.

Time to be sad, and time to play and sport;                    10
Time to take rest by way of recreation;
Time to study, and time to use comfort;
Time of pleasure, and time of consolation:
Thus time hath his time of divers manner fashion:
Time for to eat and drink for thy repast;
Time to be liberal, and time to make no waste:

Time to travail, and time for to rest;
Time for to speak, and time to hold thy peace:
Time would be used when time is best;
Time to begin, and time for to cease;                          20
And when time is, [to] put thyself in press,<1>
And when time is, to hold thyself aback:
For time well spent can never have lack.

The roots take their sap in time of vere;
In time of summer flowers fresh and green;
In time of harvest men their corn shear;
In time of winter the north wind waxeth keen,
So bitterly biting the flowers be not seen:
The calends of Janus, with his frosts hoar,                    30
That time is when people must live upon the store.

Quod Skelton, Laureat



NOTES TO ON TIME

1. put thyself in press] i.e. to go into company.



PRAYERS TO THE THREE PERSONS OF THE TRINITY

PRAYER TO THE FATHER OF HEAVEN

O RADIANT Luminary of light interminable,
Celestial Father, potential God of might,
Of heaven and earth O Lord incomparable,
Of all perfections the essential most perfite!
O Maker of mankind, that formed day and night,
Whose power imperial comprehendeth every place!
Mine heart, my mind, my thought, my whole delight
Is, after this life, to see thy glorious face:

Whose magnificence is incomprehensible,
All arguments of reason which far doth exceed,                 10
Whose Deity doubtless is indivisible,
From whom all goodness and virtue doth proceed;
Of thy support all creatures have need:
Assist me, good Lord, and grant me of thy grace,
To live to thy pleasure in word, thought, and deed,
And, after this life, to see thy glorious Face.

TO THE SECOND PERSON

O BENIGN Jesu, my sovereign Lord and King,
The only Son of God by filiation,
The Second Person without a beginning,
Both God and man our faith maketh plain relation,
Mary thy mother, by way of incarnation,
Whose glorious passion our souls doth revive!
Again all bodily and ghostly tribulation
Defend me with thy piteous wounds five.<1>

O peerless Prince, pained to the death,
Ruefully rent, thy body wan and blo,                           10
For my redemption gave up thy vital breath,
Was never sorrow like to thy deadly woe!
Grant me, out of this world when I shall go,
Thine endless mercy for my preservative:
Against the world, the flesh, the devil also,
Defend me with thy piteous wounds five.

TO THE HOLY GHOST

O FIERY fervence, inflamed with all grace,
Enkindling hearts with brands charitable,
The endless reward of pleasure and solace,
To the Father and the Son thou are communicable
In unitate<2> which is inseparable!
O water of life, O well of consolation!
Against all suggestions deadly and damnable
Rescue me, good Lord, by your preservation:

To whom is appropried the Holy Ghost by name,
The Third Person, one God in Trinity,                          10
Of perfite love thou art the ghostly flame:
O mirror of meekness, peace, and tranquillity,
My comfort, my counsel, my perfite charity!
O water of life, O well of consolation,
Against all storms of hard adversity
Rescue me, good Lord, by thy preservation.

Quod Skelton, Laureat



NOTES TO PRAYERS TO THE THREE PERSONS OF THE TRINITY

1. wounds five] A common expression in our early poetry;

"Jhesu, for thy wounds five, &c.
Minot's Poems, p. 5. ed. Ritson.

See too Dunbar's Poems, i. 229. ed. Laing.

2. In unitate] "In a unity."



WOEFULLY ARRAYED

[From the Fairfax MS. (which once belonged to Ralph Thoresby, and
now forms part of the Additional MSS., 5465, in the British
Museum), where it occurs twice,-(fol. 76 and, less perfectly, fol.
86); collated with a copy written in a very old hand on the fly-
leaves of Boetius de Discip. Schol. cum notabili commento,
Daventrie, 1496, 4to. (in the collection of the late Mr. Heber),
which has supplied several stanzas not in the Fairfax MS. It was
printed from the latter, not very correctly, by Sir John Hawkins,
Hist. of Music, ii. 89. I have followed the metrical arrangement
of the MS. in the Boetius.]

WOEFULLY arrayed, <1>
My blood, man,
For thee ran,
It may not be nay'd:
My body blo and wan,
Woefully arrayed.

Behold me, I pray thee, with all thy whole reason,
And be not so hard-hearted, and for this encheason,
Sith I for thy soul sake was slain in good season,
Beguiled and betrayed by Judas' false treason;                 10

Unkindly entreated,
With sharp cord sore fretted,
The Jews me threated,
They mowed, they grinned, they scorned me,
Condemned to death, as thou mayest see,
Woefully arrayed.

Thus naked am I nailed, O man, for thy sake!
I love thee, then love me; why sleepest thou? awake!
Remember my tender heart-root for thee brake,
With pains my veins constrained to crack:                      20
Thus tugged to and fro,
Thus wrapped all in woe,
Whereas never man was so,
Entreated thus in most cruel wise,
Was like a lamb offered in sacrifice,<2>
Woefully arrayed.

Of sharp thorn I have worn a crown on my head,
So pained, so strained, so rueful, so red;
Thus bobbed, thus robbed,<3> thus for thy love dead,
Unfeigned I dained<4> my blood for to shed:                    30
My feet and hands sore
The sturdy nails bore;
What might I suffer more
Than I have done, O man, for thee?
Come when thou list, welcome to me,
Woefully arrayed.
<5>

Of record thy good Lord I have been and shall be;
I am thine, thou art mine, my brother I call thee
Thee love I entirely; see what is befall me!
Sore beating, sore threating, to make thee, man, all free:     40
Why art thou unkind?
Why hast not me in mind?
Come yet and thou shalt find
Mine endless mercy and grace;
See how a spear my heart did race,
Woefully arrayed.

Dear brother, no other thing I of thee desire
But give me thine heart<6> free to reward mine hire:
I wrought thee, I bought thee from eternal fire;
I pray thee array thee toward my high empire                   50
Above the orient,<7>
Whereof I am regent,
Lord God omnipotent,
With me to reign in endless wealth;
Remember, man, thy soul's health.

Woefully arrayed,
My blood, man,
For thee ran,
It may not be nay'd:
My body blo and wan,                                           60
Woefully arrayed.

Explicit qd. Skelton



NOTES TO WOEFULLY ARRAYED

1. Woefully Arrayed is mentioned by our author as one of his
compositions in the Garland of Laurel, v. 1418

With the opening of this piece compare Hawes's Conversion of
Swearers, where Christ is made to exclaim,

"They new again do hang me on the rood,
They tear my sides, and are nothing dismayed,
My wounds they do open, and devour my blood:
I, god and man, most woefully arrayed,
To you complain, it may not be denayd,
Ye now to-lug me, ye tear me at the root,
Yet I to you am chief refuge and boot."

and a little after,

"Why art thou hard hearted, &c.
Sig. A iii. ed n. d. 4to.

Barclay too has,

"Some sweareth arms, nails, heart, and body,
Tearing our Lord worse than the Jews him arrayed."
The Ship of Fools, fol. 33. ed. 1570.

Woefully arrayed is, I believe, equivalent to-woefully disposed of
or treated, in a woeful condition. "Array, condition or case,
point." Palsgrave, p. 194-

"Isaac. What have I done, father, what have I said?
Abraham. Truly, no kyns ill to me.
Isaac. And thus guiltless shall be arrayed."
Abraham,-Towneley Mysteries, p. 40.

-"His [Tybert's] body was all to-beaten, and blind on the one eye.
When the king wist this, that Tybert was thus arrayed, he was sore
angry, &c." Reynard the Fox, sig. b 8. ed. 1481. Again in the same
romance, when Isegrym the wolf has received a kick on the head
from a mare, he says to Reynard, "I am so foul arrayed and sore
hurt, that an heart of stone might have pity of me." Sig. f 4.

"Who was with love: more woefully arrayed 
Than were these twain."
Hawes's Pastime of Pleasure, sig. I iiii. ed. 1555.

"I am foul arrayed with a chin cough. Laceor pertussi." - "He was
sore arrayed with sickness. Morbo atrociter conflictus est."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sigs. H iii. I U. ed. 1530.

2. Entreated thus in most cruel wise,
Was like a lamb offered in sacrifice] So in a "little dite" by
Lydgate, appended to his Testamentum;

"Drawn as a felon in most cruel wise
.  .  .  .  .
Was like a lamb offered in sacrifice."
MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 64.

3. Thus bobbed, thus robbed] MS in the Boetius has "bowed . . .
rowed". Bobbed-i.e. struck. So Lydgate in the piece cited in the
previous note;-

"Beat and eke bobbed."

and in the Coventry Mysteries, Nichodemus seeing Christ on the
cross, says

"Why have ye bobbed and thus beaten out
All his blessed blood?"
MS. Cott. Vesp. D viii. fol. 186.

Robbed-i.e. (I suppose) robed. [Qy. stripped?]

4. Unfeigned I dained] MS in the Boetius has "Unfrayned." dained -
i.e. disdained;

"Youth daineth counsel, scorning discretion."
Barclay's Fifth Egloge, sig. D ii. ed. 1570.

5. Here the Fairfax MS. concludes: what follows is given from the
MS. in the Boetius.

6. But give me thine heart] With this and v. 41 compare Lydgate's
"little dite" already cited;

"Give me thine heart, and be no more unkind."
MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 66.

7. Above the orient] MS. "I Love the Orient".



NOW SING WE, &C.

[From Bibliographical Miscellanies (edited by the Rev. Dr. Bliss),
1813, 4to., p. 48, where it is given from an imperfect volume (or
fragments of volumes) of black-letter Christmas Carols, partly
(but probably not wholly) printed by Kele.]

<1>

Now sing we, as we were wont,
Vexilla regis prodeunt.<2>

The King's banner on field is splayed,
The crosses myst'ry cannot be nay'd,
To whom our Saviour was betrayed,
And for our sake;
Thus saith he;
I suffer for thee,
My death I take,
Now sing we, &c.

Behold my shanks, behold my knees,                             10
Behold my head, arms, and thees,
Behold of me nothing thou sees
But sorrow and pine;
Thus was I spilt,
Man, for thy guilt,
And not for mine.
Now sing we, &c.

Behold my body, how Jews it dong
With knots of whipcord and scourges strong;
As streams of a well the blood outsprung 
On every side;                                                 20
The knots were knit,
Right well with wit,
They made wounds wide.
Now sing we, &c.

Man, thou shalt now understand,
Of my head, both foot and hand,
Are four c. and five thousand
Wounds and sixty;
Fifty and vii.
Were told full even
Upon my body.                                                  30
Now sing we, &c.

Sith I for love bought thee so dear,
As thou may see thyself here,
I pray thee with a right good cheer
Love me again,
That it likes me
To suffer for thee
Now all this pain.
Now sing we, &c.

Man, understand now thou shall,
Instead of drink they gave me gall,
And eisel mingled therewithal,                                 40
The Jews fell;
These pains on me
I suffered for thee
To bring thee fro hell.
Now sing we, &c.

Now for thy life thou hast misled,
Mercy to ask be thou not adread;
The least drop of blood that I for thee bled
Might cleanse thee soon
Of all the sin
The world within                                               50
If thou hadst done.
Now sing we, &c.

I was more wrother with Judas,
For he would no mercy ask,
Than I was for his trespass
When he me sold;
I was ever ready
To grant him mercy,
But he none wold.
Now sing we, &c.

Lo, how I hold my arms abroad,
Thee to receive ready y-spread!                                60
For the great love that I to thee had
Well may thou know.
Some love again
I would full fain
Thou wouldest to me show.
Now sing we, &c.

For love I ask nothing of thee
But stand fast in faith, and sin thou flee,
And pain to live in honesty
Both night and day;
And thou shalt have bliss                                      70
That never shall miss
Withouten nay.
Now sing we, &c.

Now, Jesu, for thy great goodness,
That for men suffered great hardness,
Save us from the devil's cruelness,
And to bliss us send,
And grant us grace
To see thy face
Withouten end.
Now sing we, &c.



NOTES TO NOW SING WE, &C.

1. This piece is mentioned by Skelton as his own composition in
the Garland of Laurel, v. 1420)

2. Now sing we as we were wont, 
Vexilla regis prodeunt] Vexilla regis prodeunt-"The royal banners
fly") Compare Lydgate;

"Wherefore I sing as I was wont,
Vexilla regis prodeunt."
Poem about Various birds singing praises to God,-MS. Harl. 2251.
fol. 38.

The hymn Vexilla regis prodeunt, &c. may be seen in Hymni
Ecclesiae et Breviario Parisiensi, 1838, p. 71. I ought to add
that the present poem is not a translation of it.



WARE THE HAWK

[From the ed. by Kynge and Marche of Certain Books Compiled by
Master Skelton, n.d., collated with the same work, ed. Day, n.d.
and Lant, n.d. and with Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568.]

<1>

HEREAFTER FOLLOWETH THE BOOK ENTITLED
WARE THE HAWK,
PER SKELTON, LAUREATE.

PROLOGUS SKELTONIDIS LAUREATI SUPER WARE THE HAWK.

THIS work devised is
For such as do amiss;
And specially to control
Such as have cure of soul,
That be so far abused<2>
They cannot be excused
By reason nor by law;
But that they play the daw,
To hawk, or else to hunt
From the altar to the font,                                    10
With cry unreverent,
Before the sacrament,
Within holy church's bounds,
That of our faith the ground is.
That priest that hawks so
All grace is far him fro;
He seemeth a schismatic,
Or else an heretic,
For faith in him is faint.
Therefore to make complaint                                    20
Of such misadvised
Parsons and disguised,<3>
This book we have devised,
Compendiously comprised,
No good priest to offend,
But such daws to amend,
In hope that no man shall
Be miscontent withal.

I shall you make relation,
By way of apostrophation,                                      30
Under supportation
Of your patient toleration,
How I, Skelton Laureate,
Devised and also wrate
Upon a lewd curate,
A parson beneficed,
But nothing well advised:
He shall be as now nameless,
But he shall not be blameless,
Nor he shall not be shameless;                                 40
For sure he wrought amiss
To hawk in my church of Diss.<4>
This fond frantic falconer,
With his polluted pautener,<5>
As priest unreverent,
Straight to the sacrament
He made his hawk to fly,
With hideous shout and cry.
The high altar he stripped naked;
Thereon he stood, and craked;                                  50
He shook down all the cloths,
And sware horrible oaths
Before the face of God,
By Moses and Aaron's rod,
Ere that he hence yede,
His hawk should prey and feed
Upon a pigeon's maw.
The blood ran down raw
Upon the altar-stone;
The hawk tired<6> on a bone;                                   60
And in the holy place
She muted there a chase<7>
Upon my corporas face.
Such sacrificium laudis<8>
He made with such gambades.

OBSERVATE

His second hawk waxed gery,<9>
And was with flying weary;
She had flown so oft,
That on the rood-loft<10>
She perched her to rest.                                       70
The falconer then was pressed,
Came running with a dow,
And cried Stow, stow, stow!<11>
But she would not bow.
He then, to be sure,
Called her with a lure.<12>
Her meat was very crude,
She had not well endued;
She was not clean ensaimed,
She was not well reclaimed:                                    80
But the falconer unfained
Was much more feebler brained.
The hawk had no list
To come to his fist; 
She looked as she had the frounce;<13>
With that he gave her a bounce
Full upon the gorge:
I will not feign nor forge;
The hawke with that clap
Fell down with evil hap.                                       90
The church doors were sparred,
Fast bolted and barred,
Yet with a pretty gin
I fortuned to come in,
This rebel to behold,
Whereof I him controlled;
But he said that he would,
Against my mind and will,
In my church hawke still.

CONSIDERATE<14>

On Saint John decollation<15>                                 100
He hawked in this fashion,
Tempore vesperarum,
Sed non secundum Sarum<16>
But like a March hare-um
His brains were so parum.<17>
He said he would not let
His hounds for to fet,
To hunt there by liberty
In the despite of me,
And to halloo there the fox:                                  110
Down went my offering-box,
Book, bell, and candle,
All that he might handle:
Cross, staff, lectern, and banner,
Fell down in this manner.

DELIBERATE<18>

With troll, cytrace, and trovy,<19>
They ranged Hankin Bovy,<20>
My church all about.
This falconer then gan shout,
These be my gospellers,                                       120
These be my epistolers,<21>
These be my choristers,
To help me to sing,
My hawks to matins ring.
In this priestly guiding<22>
His hawk then flew upon
The rood with Mary and John.<23>
Dealt he not like a fon?
Dealt he not like a daw?
Or else is this God's law,                                    130
Decrees or decretals,
Or holy synodals,
Or else provincials,
Thus within the walls
Of holy Church to deal,
Thus to ring a peal
With his hawk's bells?
Doubtless such losels
Make the church to be
In small authority:                                           140
A curate in special
To snapper and to fall
Into this open crime;
To look on this were time.

VIGILATE<24>

But whoso that looks
In the official booke,
There he may see and read
That this is matter indeed.
Howbeit, maiden Meed<25>
Made them to be agreed,                                       150
And so the Scribe was fee'd,
And the Pharisee
Then durst nothing say,
But let the matter slip,
And made truth to trip;
And of the spiritual law
They made but a gewgaw,
And took it out in drink,
And thus the cause doth shrink:
The Church is thus abused,                                    160
Reproached and polluted:
Correction hath no place,
And all for lack of grace.

DEPLORATE<26>

Look now in Exodi<27>
And de arca Domini,<28>
With Regum<29> by and by;
(The Bible will not lie);
How the Temple was kept,
How the Temple was swept,
Where sanguis taurorum,                                       170
Aut sanguis vitulorum, <30>
Was offered within the walls,
After ceremonials;
When it was polluted 
Sentence was executed,
By way of expiation
For reconciliation.

DEVINITATE<31>

Then much more, by the rood,
Where Christ's precious blood
Daily offered is,                                             180
To be polluted thus;
And that he wished withal
That the dove's dung down might fall
Into my chalice at Mass,
When consecrated was
The blessed Sacrament:
O priest unreverent!
He said that he would hunt
From the altar to the font.

REFORMATE<32>

Of no tyrant I read                                           190
That so far did exceed,
Neither Diocletian,
Nor yet Domitian,
Nor yet crooked Cacus,<33>
Nor yet drunken Bacchus;
Neither Olibrius,<34>
Nor Dionysius;
Neither Phalary;
Rehearsed in Valery;<35>
Nor Sardanapall,<36>                                          200
Unhappiest of all;
Nor Nero the worst,
Nor Claudius the curst;
Nor yet Egeas,<37>
Nor yet Sir Ferumbras;<38>
Neither Zorobabel,
Nor cruel Jezebel;
Nor yet Tarquinius,
Whom Titus Livius
In writing doth enroll;                                       210
I have read them poll by poll;<39>
The story of Aristobel,<40>
And of Constantinople,
Which city miscreants<41> won
And slew many a Christian man;
Yet the Soldan, nor the Turk,
Wrought never such a work,
For to let their hawks fly
In the Church of Saint Sophy;<42>
With much matter more,                                        220
That I keep in store.

PENSITATE<43>

Then in a table plain
I wrote a verse or twain,
Whereat he made disdain:
The peakish parson's brain
Could not reach nor attain
What the sentence meant;
He said, for a crooked intent,
The words were perverted:
And thus he overthwarted.                                     230
Of the which process
Ye may know more express,
If it please you to look
In the residue of this book.

Hereafter followeth the table.

Look on this table,
Whether thou art able
To read or to spell
What these verses tell.

Sicculo lutureis est colo búraará
Nixphedras visarum caniuter tuntantes
Raterplas Natábrian umsudus itnugenus.
18.10.2.11.19.4.13.3.3.1 téuvalet.
Chartula stet, precor, haec nullo temeranda petulco.
Has rapiet numeros non homo, sed mala bos.
Ex parte rem chartae adverte asperte, pone Musam Arethusam
hanc.<44>

Whereto should I rehearse
The sentence of my verse?                                     240
In them be no schools
For brain-sick frantic fools:
Construas hoc,<45>
Domine Dawcock!

Ware the hawk!
Master sophista,
Ye simplex syllogista,
Ye devilish dogmatista,<46>
Your hawk on your fist-a,
To hawk when you list-a                                       250
In ecclesia ista,
Domine concupisti,<47>
With thy hawk on thy fisty?
Nunquid sic dixisti?
Nunquid sic fecisti?
Sed ubi hoc legisti,
Aut unde hoc,<48>
Doctor Dawcock?

Ware the hawk!
Doctor Dialetica,                                             260
Where find you in Hypothetica,
Or in Categoria,
Latina sive Dorica,
To use your hawk's forica
In propitiatorio,
Tanquam diversorio? 
Unde hoc, <50>
Domine Dawcock?

Ware the hawk!
Say to me, Jack Harris,<51>                                   270
Quare aucuparis
Ad sacramentum altaris?<52>
For no reverence thou spares
To shake thy pigeon's feathers
Super arcam foederis:
Unde hoc,<53>
Doctor Dawcock?

Ware the hawk!
Sir Dominus vobiscum,<54>
Per aucupium<55>                                              280
Ye made your hawk to come
Desuper candelabrum
Christi Crucifixi<56>
To feed upon your fisty:
Dic, inimice crucis Christi,
Ubi didicisti
Facere hoc,<57> 
Domine Dawcock?

Ware the hawk!
Apostata Julianus,                                            290
Nor yet Nestorianus,<58>
Thou shalt nowhere read
That they did such a deed,
To let their hawkes fly
Ad ostium tabernaculi,
In que est corpus Domine
Cave hoc,<59>
Doctor Dawcock!

Ware the hawk!
Thus doubtless ye raved,                                      300
Diss church ye thus depraved;<60>
Wherefore, as I be saved,
Ye are therefore beknaved:
Quare? quia Evangelia,
Concha et conchylia,
Accipter et sonalia,
Et bruta animalia,
Caetera quoque talia
Tibi sunt aequalia:
Unde hoc,<61>                                                 310
Domine Dawcock?

Ware the hawk!
Et relis et ralis,
Et reliqualis,<62>
From Granada to Galis,<63>
From Winchelsea to Wales,
Non est brain-sick talis,
Nec minus rationalis,
Nec magis bestialis,<64>
That sings with a chalice:                                    320
Construas hoc,<45>
Doctor Dawcock!
Ware the hawk!
Mazed, witless, smeary smith,
Hampar with your hammer upon thy stith,
And make hereof a sickle or a saw,
For though ye live a c. year, ye shall die a daw.
Vos valete,
Doctor indiscrete!<65>



NOTES TO WARE THE HAWK

1. This poem was evidently called forth by a real event; but the
name of the "hawking parson" has not transpired. According to
Barclay, skill in hawking sometimes advanced its possessor to a
benefice;

"But if I durst truth plainly utter and express,
This is the special cause of this inconvenience,
That greatest fools, and fullest of lewdness,
Having least wit, and simplest science,
Are first promoted, and have greatest reverence,
For if one can flatter, and bear a hawk on his fist,
He shall be made Parson of Honington or of Clist."
The Ship of Fools, fol. 2. ed. 1570.

I may add, that afterwards, in the same work, when treating of
indecorous behaviour at church, Barclay observes;

"Into the Church then comes another sot,
Without devotion, jetting up and down,
Or to be seen, and to show his garded coat:
Another on his fist a Sparhawk or Falcon," &c.
fol. 85.

2. abused] i.e. vitiated, depraved.

"Be all young gallants of these abused sort,
Which in young age unto the court resort?"
Barclay's Third Egloge, sig. C ii. ed. 1570.

3. disguised] i.e. guilty of unbecoming conduct: so again in our
author's Colyn Cloute;

"They mought be better advised
Than to be so disguised." 
v. 581.

4. Diss] A town in Norfolk, of which Skelton was rector; see
Account of Skelton and his Writings.

5. pautener] i.e. a net-bag. "Pautner [Pawtenere, MS. Hari. 221.]
Cassidile." Prompt. Parv. ed. 1499. "Will. Brito: Cassidile
dicitur pera Aucupis in modum reticuli facta, in quo ponit quos in
casse, id est, rete, cepit." (A bag of the type called a pera made
by a bird-catcher, in which he puts the game he takes with a net")
Du Cange's Gloss. in v. "Pera . . . anglice a scrip or a
pautener." Ortus Vocab. fol. ed. W. de Worde, n. d.

6. tired] A term in falconry: the hawk tired on what was thrown to
her, when she pulled at and tore it.

7. a chase] i.e. a spot. Compare a passage in that curious tract,
by Walter Smith, xii Merry Jests of the widow Edith;

"Her pottage & eke her ale were well powdered 
With an wholesome influence that surgeons call 
Pouder Sinipari that will make one cast his gall:"

in consequence of which, she is compelled suddenly to quit the
supper-table, and,

"When that she was up, she got her forth apace,
And ere she had walked xxx foot, she marked a chase
And eftsoons another, through the Hall as she yede," &c.
Sig. f iii. ed. 1573.

"A chase at tennis is that spot where a ball falls, beyond which
the adversary must strike his ball to gain a point or chase. At
long tennis, it is the spot where the ball leaves off rolling."
Douce's Illust. of Shakespeare, i. 485. Compare our author's Why
come ye not to Court, v. 880.

8. sacrificium laudis] "Sacrifice of praise" i.e. the Mass

9. gery] "Gerish, wilde or light headed, farouche." Palsgrave, p.
313.

"How gery fortune, furious and wood."
Lydgate's Fall of Prynces, B. iii. leaf lxxvii. ed. Wayland.

"And as a swallow gerish of her flight,
'Tween slow and swift, now crooked now upright:"
ibid. B. vi. leaf cxxxiiii.

Tyrwhitt explains "gery-changeable." Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant.
Tales. Richardson observes that in the present passage of Skelton
"it seems to be giddy (sc.) with turning round." Dict. in v.

10. the rood loft] A loft (generally placed just over the passage
out of the church into the chancel,) where stood the rood,-an
image of Christ on the cross, with figures of the Virgin Mary and
Saint John on each side of it: compare v. 126 of the present poem:

"His hawk then flew upon
The rood with Mary and John."

11. And cried, Stow, stow, stow!] So Fancy, in our author's
Magnificence, exclaims to his bird, (which, however, appears to
have been an owl)

"Stow, bird, stow, stow!
It is best I feed my hawk now."
zs.

Compare Brathwait's Merlin;

"But stow, bird, stow,
See now the game's afoot,
And white-mail'd Nisus,
He is flying to't."
Odes, p. 250, appended to Nature's Embassy, 1621.

"Make them come from it to your fist, either much or little, with
calling and chirping to them, saying: Towe, Towe, or Stow, Stow,
as Falconers use." Turbervile's Book of Falconry, &c. p. 182. ed.
1611.

12. lure] i.e. "that whereto falconers call their young hawks, by
casting it up in. the air, being made of feathers and leather in
such wise that in the motion it looks not unlike a fowl." Latham,
quoted by Halliwell, Dict.

13. the frounce] Is a distemper in which a whitish foam gathers in
wrinkles (frounces) about the hawk's mouth and palate. "The
Frounce proceedeth of moist and cold humours, which descend from
the hawk's head to their palate and the root of the tongue. And of
that cold is engendered in the tongue the Frounce," &c.
Turbervile's Book of Falconry, &c. p. 303. ed. 1611.

14. CONSIDERATE] "Regard carefully"

15. On Saint John decollation] i.e. On the festival of the
beheading of St. John. (29th August)

16. Tempore vesperarum,
Sed non secundum Sarum] i.e. "At the time of vespers, but not
according to (the ordinals of Osmond, Bishop of) Sarum." So in Sir
D. Lyndsay's Complaint of the Papingo;

"Suppose the geese and hens should cry alarum,
And we shall serve secundum usum Sarum."
Works, i. 327. ed. Chal.

The proverbial expression, "It is done secundum usum Sarum," is
thus explained by Fuller: "It began on this occasion; Many Offices
or forms of service were used in several Churches in England, as
the Office of York, Hereford, Bangor, &c. which caused a deal of
confusion in God's Worship, until Osmond Bishop of Sarum, about
the year of our Lord 1090, made that Ordinal or Office which was
generally received all over England, so that Churches thence
forward easily understood one another, all speaking the same words
in their liturgy. It is now applied to those persons which do, and
actions which are formally and solemnly done, in so regular a way
by authentic precedents, and patterns of unquestionable authority,
that no just exception can be taken thereat." Worthies
(Wiltshire), p. 146. ed. 1662.

17. parum] "Insufficient"

18. DELIBERATE] "Consider well"

19. With, troll, cytrace, and trovy] So in Apius and Virginia, by
R. B., 1575;

"With hey trick, how trowle, trey trip, and trey trace."
 Sig. B.

20. Hankin Bovy] The name of a dance. Compare Thersytes, n. d.;

"And we will have minstrelsy
that shall pipe hankyn boby."
p. 62. Roxb. ed.

and Nash's Have with you to Saffron-walden, 1596; "No vulgar
respects have I, what Hoppenny Hoe and his fellow Hankin Booby
think of me." Sig. K 2: and Brome's Jovial Crew, 1652; "he makes
us even sick of his sadness, that were wont to see my Gossips cock
to-day, mould Cocklebread, dance clutterdepouch and Hannykin
booby, bind barrels, or do any thing before him, and he would
laugh at us." Act ii. sc. i. [For mould Cocklebread, sc. Aubrey in
Thoms Anecd. & Tradit. (1697) p.94 "Young wenches have a wanton
sport which they call moulding of cockle-bread, viz. they get upon
a table-board, and then gather up their knees and their coats with
their hands as high as they can, and then they wobble to and fro,
as if they were kneading of dough, and say these words, viz. 'My
dame is sick and gone to bed, And I'll go mould my Cockle-
bread.'"]

21. gospellers ... epistolers] i.e. priests that chant the gospel
and the epistle, respectively, at Mass.

22. guiding] "He controlled my living and guiding .... mores."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. N vi. ed. 1530.

"Wise women has ways, and wonderful guidings."
Dunbar's tale of The Two Married Women and the Widow,-Poems, i.
77. ed. Laing.

23. The rood with Mary and John] See note 10 above.

24. VIGILATE] Be attentive.

25. maiden Meed] See the allegorical account of Meed in Piers
Plowman; where we find,

"That is meed the maid, quod she, hath noyed me full oft."
Sig. B iv. ed. 1561.

26. DEPLORATE] "Lament this".

27. Exodi] i.e. the book of Exodus.

"In Exodi ben these mentions."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. i. leaf vii. ed. Wayland.

28. de arca Domini] "about the Ark of the Covnenant"

29. Regum] i.e. The Third, now called The First, Book of Kings.

30. sanguis taurorum,
Aut sanguis vitulorum] "The blood of a bull, or the blood of a
calf".

31. DEVINITATE] Qy "Divinate"? ("Foretell, prophesy")

32. REFORMATE] "Transform"

33. Cacus] A cruel giant who ruled in Carthage.See extract from
The Recuel of the Histories of Troy, in note 8 to Epitaph For John
Clarke And Adam Udersall.

34. Olibrius] was "the provost" by whose order Saint Margaret,
after being put to sundry tortures, was beheaded at Antioch.
Golden Legend, fol. ccxiiii. sqq. ed. 1483. See also The Legend of
Saint Margaret, printed from the Auchinleck MS., in Turnbull's
Legendae Catholicae. Most readers will recollect Mr. Milman's
dramatic poem, The Martyr of Antioch.

35. Phalary,
Rehearsed in Valery] i.e. Phalaris, recorded in Valerius Maximus,
(lib. iii. cap. iii. where it is related that the Agrigentines, at 
the instigation of Zeno Eleates, stoned the tyrant Phalaris to
death. "'Tis plain," says Bentley, "he mistakes Phalaris for
Nearchus." Diss. upon the Ep. of Phalaris,-Works, 1. 241. ed.
Dyce, and lib. ix. cap. ii.)

36. Sardanapall] i.e. Sardanapalus, legendary king of Assyria. So
our early writers often spell his name;

"Last of all was Sardanapall."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, Book ii. leaf L. ed. Wayland.

37. Egeas] Is mentioned with various other evil personages in The
Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy,

"Herod thy other eame, and great Egeas."
Dunbar's Poems, ii. 86. ed. Laing.

and in the Second Part of Marlowe's Tamburlaine;

"The headstrong jades of Thrace Alcides tamed,
That King Egeus fed with human flesh."
Last sc. of act iv. sig G 3. ed. 1606.

38. Sir Ferumbras] A Saracen giant vanquished by Oliver. See note
11 to Poems Against Garnesche.

39. poll by poll] i.e. head by head,-one by one.

"And ye shall here the names poll by poll."
Cock Lorell's Boat, sig. B ii.

40. Aristobel] i.e. (I suppose) Aristobulus,-who, having succeeded
his father Hyrcanus as high-priest and governor of Judea, assumed
the title of king,-cast his mother into prison, and starved her to
death,-caused his brother Antigonus to be assassinated,-and died
after reigning a year. See Prideaux's Connect. Part ii. B. vi.

41. miscreants] i.e. infidels. "These three kings were the first
of miscreants that believed on Christ." The three kings of
Cologne, sig. C ii. ed. 1526.

42. The church of Saint Sophy] i.e. Hagia Sophia, in
Constantinople.

43. PENSITATE] "Weigh this well"

44. Sicculo lutureis &c.] This cipher has been decoded by Henry
Bradley, in The Academy, Vol 50 (1896) p. 83:

TWO PUZZLES IN SKELTON
July 18,1896.

One of my friends, who has a morbid interest in John Skelton,
recently asked me whether I could throw any light on the
interpretation of two cryptographic passages in the writings of
that extraordinary windbag. Although I do not think the
illustration of Skelton is worthy of any great expenditure of
labour, a childish fondness for puzzles has tempted me to try
whether I could make anything of the passages in question. I think
I have succeeded; possibly my solution may have been anticipated,
but I am not aware that any explanation has been published.

One of the passages occurs in "The Garland of Laurel," after line
750 in Dyce's edition. Skelton indicates the name of one of his
enemies by the following cipher:

17. 4. 2. 17. 5. 18.
18. 19. 1. 19. 8. 5. 12

The other passage is in "Ware the Hawk," between the lines
numbered by Dyce 239 and 240, and is as follows:

"Sicculo lutueris est colo buraara
Nizphedras uisarum caniuter tuntantes
Raterplas Natabrian umsudus itnugenus
18.10. 2. 11. 19. 1. 13. 3. 3. 1. Teualet
Chartula stet, precor, haec nullo temeranda petulco:
Hoc rapiet numeros non homo sed mala bos.
Ex parte rem chartae adverte aperte, pone Musam Arethusam hanc."

The numerical ciphers, I think, are transparent enough. Skelton
denotes the consonants by the numbers marking their places in the
alphabet, and the vowels by the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The three
figures 2, 3, 4, have thus a twofold value: they may either mean
b, c, d, or e, i, o respectively.

The name of Skelton's enemy is therefore ROGERUS STATHUM. Whether
this person is otherwise known I have not ascertained. The other
cipher reads SKELTONICA; but I suspect that Skelton has
inadvertently written a 3 for a 4, and that the ciphers with the
four succeeding letters are to be read Skeltonida vatem, which is
elsewhere the Laureate's way of Latinising himself in the
accusative. The rest of the first four lines is anagrammatic: the
syllables of all the long words are transposed (without any other
inversion), and after each word two, three, or four unmeaning
letters are added to mislead the decipherer. The first four lines,
therefore, yield the following hexameters

"Sic, velut est Arabum phenix avis unica tantum,
Terra Britanna suum genuit Skeltonida vatem."
("Just as Arabia has produced that exceptional bird, the Phoenix
The land of Britain has produced the poet Skelton. ")

The distich is certainly eminently Skeltonical, both in its
Latinity and in its sentiment. Whether any anagram lurks in the
last three lines of the passage, and whether there is any meaning
in the inserted syllables culo, ris, colo, ram, dras, rum, ter,
tes, plat, an, das, nus, let, are questions which I gladly leave
to the future editor of Skelton.

The translation of the whole passage, therefore, is

"Just as Arabia has produced that exceptional bird, the Phoenix
The land of Britain has brought forth the poet Skelton. 
I pray that this little paper may remain, to be violated by no
wanton person
Not a man, only an evil ox may destroy these numbers.
Perceive the meaning of this paper, place there the Arethusan
muse."

45. Construas hoc] "Translate that"

46. Master sophista,
Ye simplex syllogista,
Ye devilish dogmatista] "Master sophist, Ye simple logician, Ye
devilish theologian."

47. In ecclesia ista,
Domine concupisti] "In that church, you defiled the Lord"

48. Nunquid sic dixisti?
Nunquid sic fecisti?
Sed ubi hoc legisti,
Aut unde hoc,] "Did you never say so? Did you never act so? But
where did you read that, or whence this?"

49. Latina sive Dorica] "In Latin or Greek"

50. Forica] To use your hawk's forica
In propitiatorio,
Tanquam diversorio
Unde hoc] "To allow your hawk to use the propitiatory as a privy,
as if it were in a tavern, whence that?" Propitiatory is the
Mercy-seat or seat of atonement, Hebrews 9:5.

51. Jack Harris] Must not be mistaken for the name of the person
who called forth this piece; we have been already told that he
"shall be nameless," v. 38. So in our author's Magnificence,
Courtly Abusion terms Cloaked Collusion "cankered Jack Hare." v.
768. There is a poem by Lydgate (at least attributed to him)
concerning a personage called Jack Hare, of which the first stanza
is as follows

"A froward knave plainly to describe,
And a sluggard plainly to declare,
A precious knave that cast him never to thrive, 
His mouth well wet, his sleeves right threadbare, 
A tournebroche, a boy for wat of ware
With lowering face nodding and slumbering,
Of new christened called Jack Hare,
Which of a bowl can pluck out the lining."
MS. Hail. 2251. fol. 14.

Since the above note was written, the ballad on Jack Hare has been
edited from MS. Lansd. 699. fol. 88, by Mr. Halliwell, among
Lydgate's Minor Poems, p. 52 (printed for the Percy Society). "The
original of this," says Mr. H. (p. 267), "is an Anglo-Norman poem
of the 13th century, in MS. Digb. Oxon. 86. fol. 94, entitled 'De
Maimound mal esquier.'"

52. Quare aucuparis
Ad sacramentum altaris?] "Why do you go bird-catching by the
sacrament of the altar?"

53. Super arcam foederis
Unde hoc?] "Over the Ark of the Covenant., whence that?"

54. Dominus Vobiscum] "The Lord be with you."

55. Per aucupium] "by bird-catching"

56. Desuper candelabrum
Christi Crucifixi] "From above the candlesticks of Christ
crucified"

57. Dic, inimice crucis Christi,
Ubi didicisti
Facere hoc] "Say, enemy of Christ's cross, where did you learn to
do this?"

58. Nestorianus] "Nestoriani quidam heretici qui beatam mariam non
dei, sed hominis dicunt genitricem" ("Nestorians are heretics who
say the Blessed Virgin was the mother of a man, not of God") Ortus
Vocab. fol. ed. W. de Worde, n. d.: but here Nestorianus seems to
be put for Nestorius, the founder of the sect.

59. Ad ostium tabernaculi,
In que est corpus Domine:
Cave hoc,] "Even to the door of the tabernacle, where the body of
the Lord is: beware of that"

60. Diss church ye thus depraved] To deprave generally means-to
vilify in words (as in our author's Colyn Cloute, "The Church to
deprave," v. 515; but (and see the poem The Doughty Duke of Albany
v. 191) here depraved must be equivalent to-defiled.

61. Quare? quia Evangelia,
Concha et conchylia,
Accipter et sonalia,
Et bruta animalia,
Caetera quoque talia
Tibi sunt aequalia
Unde hoc] "Why? Because the Gospels, holy vessels, a hawk and
bells, and brutish animals, and other such things are alike to
you. Whence that?"

62. Et relis et ralis,
Et reliqualis] Perhaps means "You strike back, and rail, but are
left behind." Occurs again in our author's Garland of Laurel, v.
1216.

63. Galis] i.e. Galicia.

64 Non est brain-sick talis 
Nec minus rationalis,
Nec magis bestialis] "It is not so brain-sick, nor less
reasonable, nor more bestial"

65. Vos valete,
Doctor indiscrete!] "Goodbye, undistinguished doctor!"



EPITAPH FOR JOHN CLARKE AND ADAM UDERSALL

[From Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568]

Note: This poem is mostly in Latin. A translation is printed
below.

THIS treatise devised it is
Of two knaves sometime of Diss.
Though these knaves be dead,
Full of mischief and queed,
Yet, wheresoever they lie,
Their names shall never die.

Compendium de duobus versipellibus, John Jayberd, et Adam all a
knave, deque illorum notissima vilitate.

A DEVOUT TRENTAL<1> FOR OLD JOHN CLARKE, SOMETIME THE
HOLY PATRIARCH OF DISS

Sequitur trigintale
Tale quale rationale,
Licet parum curiale,
Tamen satis est formale,
Joannis Clerc, hominis
Cujusdam multinominis,
Joannes Jayberd qui vocatur,
Clerc cleribus nuncupatur.
Obiit sanctus iste pater
Anna Domini MD. sexto.                                         10
In parochia de Dis
Non erat sibi similis;
In malitia vir insignis,
Duplex corde et bilinguis;
Senio confectus,
Omnibus suspectus,
Nemini dilectus,
Sepultus est among the weeds:
God forgive him his misdeeds!

Dulce melos
Penetrans coelos.

Carmina cum cannis
cantemus festa Joannis:
Clerk obiit vere,
Jayberd nomenque dedere:
Dis popula natus,
Clerk cleribus estque vocatus.
Hic vir Chaldaeus,
nequam vir, ceu Jebusaeus,
In Christum Domini
fremuit de more cameli,                                        10
Rectori proprio
tam verba retorta loquendo
Unde resultando-
que Acheronta boando tonaret.<2>
Nunquam sincere
solitus sua crimina flere;
male lingua loquax-
que dicax mendaxque, fuere
Et mores tales
resident in nemine quales;                                     20
Carpens vitales
auras, turbare sodales
Et cines socios,
asinus, mulus velut, et bos.
Omne suum studium
rubeum pictum per amictum
Discolor; et victum
faciens semper maledictum
Ex intestinis ovium-
que boumque caprorum;                                          30
Tendens adque forum,
fragmentum colligit horum, 
Dentibus exemptis
mastigat cumque polentis
Lanigerum caput aut ovis<3>
aut vaccae mugientis.
Quid petis, hic sit quis?
John Jayberd, incola de Dis;
Cui, dum vixerat is,
sociantur jurgia, vis, lis.                                    40

Jam jacet hic stark dead,
Never a tooth in his head.
Adieu, Jayberd, adieu,
In faith, deacon thou crew!<4>
Fratres, orate
For this knavate,
By the holy rood,
Did never man good:
I pray you all,
And pray shall,                                                50
At this trental
On knees to fall
To the football;
With, Fill the black bowl
For Jayberd's soul.

Bibite multum:
Ecce sepultum
Sub pede stultum,
Asinum, et mulum!
The devil kiss his culum!                                      60
Hey, ho, rumbelow!<5>
Rumpopulorum,
Per omnia secula seculorum! Amen

REQUIEM, &c.

Per Fredericum Hely,
Fratrem de Monte Carmeli,
Qui condunt sine sale
Hoc devotum trigintale.
Vale Jayberd, valde male!

Adam Uddersall,<6>
Alias dictus Adam all
a knave, his
Epitaph followeth devoutly;
He was sometime the holy
Bailiff of Diss.

OF DISS.

Adam degebat:
dum vixit, falsa gerebat,
Namque extorquebat
quicquid nativus habebat,
Aut liber natus; rapidus
lupus inde vocatus:
Ecclesiamque satus
de Belial iste Pilatus
Sub pede calcatus
violavit, nunc violatus:
Perfidus, iratus,
numquam fuit ille beatus:                                      10
Uddersall stratus
benedictis est spoliatus,
Improbus, inflatus,
maledictis jam laceratus:
Dis, tibi bacchatus<7>
ballivus praedominatus:
Hic fuit ingratus,
porcus velut insatiatus,                                       20
Pinguis, crassatus;
velut Agag sit reprobatus!
Crudelisque Cacus
barathro, peto, sit tumulatus!<8>
Beelzebub his soul save,
Qui jacet hic, like a knave!
Jam scio mortuus est,
Et jacet hic, like a beast.
Anima ejus
De malo in pejus. Amen

De Dis haec semper erit camena,
Adam Uddersall sit anathema!

Auctore Skelton, rectore de Dis.

Finis, &c. Apud Trumpinton scriptum per Curatum ejusdem, quinto
die Januarii Anna Domini, secundum computat. Angliae, MDVII.<9>

Adam, Adam, ubi es? Genesis. Re. Ubi nulla regales, ubi nullus
ordo, sed sempiternus horror inhabitat. Job.

TRANSLATION
(Translation in italics - Roman letters indicate English words in
the original)

A compendium of two little poems, about John Jayberd and Adam-all-
a-knave, and their notorious worthlessness.

EPITAPH FOR JOHN CLARKE AND ADAM UDERSALL, SOMETIME THE
HOLY PATRIARCH OF DISS

There follows a trental,
So great in logic,
So little is allowed by the court
However it is formal enough
John Clerk, a man
Who had many names,
Who was called John Jayberd;
Clerk by the Clergy.
This holy father died
in the year of the Lord 1506.
in the parish of Diss
There was none like him;
A man notable for malice,
Two-hearted and two-tongued
His years completed,
Mistrusted by all,
Loved by none
He is buried among the weeds:
God forgive him his misdeeds!

A sweet tune
filling the air.

A song with reed instruments
We will sing on the feast of John,
Clerk is truly dead,
Who was given the name Jayberd:
Born of the people of Dis,
Clerk, this cleric was called.
This Chaldean man,
not a man, but a Jebusite
In Christ the Lord,
He brayed like a camel,
Speaking such words
To the rector of that place,
And to whom he retorted
thundering like the river Acheron.
Never honestly
repenting his habitual crimes
Speaking with an evil tongue,
telling lies, 
And his morals were such
As no-one else had;
Using all his breath,
To disturb the companions
and the neighbours on this side,
Just like an ass, a mule and an ox.
All his effort went into
smearing and blackening,
And his livelihood
was in always making curses
from the entrails of sheep,
oxen and goats;
Going to the market-place
to gather up scraps,
Having no teeth,
he ate with his porridge, 
The head of a lamb, sheep or cow.
What do you ask, who might this be?
John Jayberd, inhabitant of Diss
Who while he lived, 
Was associated with forceful quarrels and strife.

Now he is struck stark dead,
Never a tooth in his head.
Adieu, Jayberd, adieu,
In faith, deacon thou crew!
Brothers, pray
For this knavate,
By the holy rood,
Did never man good:
I pray you all,
And pray shall,
At this trental
On knees to fall
To the football;
With, Fill the black bowl
For Jayberd's soul.

Drink deeply,
This tomb underfoot
is that of a fool
An ass and a mule!
The devil kiss his arse!
Hey, ho, rumbelow!
Rumpopulorum,
For ever and ever. Amen.

By Frederic Hely,
A brother of the Carmelite order,
Who conducted without pay,
This trental devotion.
Go, Jayberd, extremely badly!

Adam Uddersall,
Otherwise called Adam all
a knave, his
Epitaph followeth devoutly;
He was sometime the holy
Bailiff of Diss.

Adam has passed away,
While he lived, he behaved dishonestly
and he extorted
Whatever the people had,
Either serf or free-born.
Thus he was called a ravening wolf:
And this Pilate from Belial
trampled the violated
church underfoot:
Treacherous, wrathful,
Never did he do what was virtuous:
Udersall's pompous blessing spread 
robbery, wickedness,
Curses and wounds:
Diss, to you this enraged
bailiff was a tyrant:
He was hateful,
like a greedy pig
Obese, stuffed with food,
May he be condemned like Agag!
And I pray, may he be entombed in a pit
like cruel Cacus!
Beelzebub his soul save,
Who is buried here, like a knave!
For I know he is dead,
And is buried here, like a beast.
May his soul go
from bad to worse. Amen

This will always be the song of Diss,
May Adam Udersall be anathema!

Written by Skelton, rector of Diss

The end, &c. Transcribed in Trumpington by the curate of that
place on the fifth of January 1507, (according to English
reckoning).

Adam, Adam, where are you? Genesis. Where there is no rest, where
there is no order, but everlasting horror dwelleth. Job



NOTES TO EPITAPH FOR JOHN CLARKE AND ADAM UDERSALL

1. trental] i.e. properly, a service of thirty masses for the
dead, usually celebrated on as many different days.

2. que Acheronta boando tonaret, &c] Perhaps these passages ought
to be arranged thus for the sake of the rhyme:

"que Acheronta boando
tonaret. Nunquam sincere," &c
. . . . . . 
"que dicax mendax-
que, fuere et mores tales," &c

But from the rest of the poem it seems that Skelton intended each
hexameter to be cut only into two parts

3. Lanigerum caput aut ovis] Ed. "caput caput". I give the
conjectural reading of the Rev. J. Mitford. The rhyme suggests
(but the metre will not allow) "bidentis."

4. I faith, deacon thou crew!] See note 38 to The Bowge of Court.

5. With, hey, ho, rumbelow] See note 18 to The Bowge of Court.

6. Adam Uddersall &c.] In this passage I have followed the 
arrangement followed by the Rev. J. Mitford.-ED. thus:

Adam Uddersale, alias dictus
Adam all. A knave his Epitaph.
followeth devoutly
He was sometime the holy
baillyve of Dis."

7. Dis, tibi, &c. ] The emendation of the Rev. J. Mitford: compare
above, "baillyve of Dis."-Ed.

"Sis tibi baccatus
Bailans praedominatus."

8. Crudelisque Cacus
barathro, peto, sit tumulatus] To readers of Skelton's days Cacus
was known not so much from the 8th book of Virgil's Aeneid, as
from The Recuel of the Histories of Troy, (a translation by Caxton
from the French of Raoul le Fevre), where his story is related at
considerable length, and with great variation from the classical
fable: "In the city of Cartagena, a king and giant reigned, named
Cacus which was passing evil and full of tyranny, and had slain by
his cursedness the kings of Aragon and of Navarre, their wives and
their children and possessed her seignouries and also held in
subjection all the country into Italy," &c. Book ii. ed. 1471-
about the middle of the volume, which is printed without paging or
signatures. His death is afterwards thus described: "But Hercules
ran after and retained him and enbraced him in his arms so hard
that he might not move and brought him again and bore him unto a
deep pit that was in the cave where he had cast in all ordures and
filth. Hercules came unto this foul pit that the Greeks had
founden and planted Cacus therein, his head downward from on high
unto the ordure beneath. Then the Italians came about the pit and
cast so many stones upon him that he died there miserably. Such
was the end of the power[ful] king Cacus. He died in an hole full
of ordure and of stinking filth."

9. Apud Trumpinton scriptum, per Curatum ejusdem, &c.] A passage
wrongly understood by Skelton's biographers: see Account of
Skelton and his Writings.



AGAINST THE SCOTS

[The following pieces, called forth by the battle of Flodden, and
the lines on the Battle of the Spurs annexed to them, are from the
ed. of Kyng and Marche of Certain Books Compiled by Master
Skelton, n.d., collated with the same work, ed. Day, n.d., ed.
Lant, n.d., and with Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568.]

<1>

AGAINST the proud Scots clattering,
That never will leave their trattling:
Won they the field, and lost their king?
They may well say, Fie on that winning!

Lo, these fond sots<2>
And trattling Scots,
How they are blind
In their own mind,
And will not know
Their overthrow                                                10
At Brankston Moor!
They are so stour,
So frantic mad,
They say they had
And won the field
With spear and shield:
That is as true
As black is blue
And green is grey.
Whatever they say,                                             20
Jemmy is dead
And closed in lead,<3>
That was their own king:
Fie on that winning!

At Flodden hills
Our bows, our bills,
Slew all the flower
Of their honour.
Are not these Scots
Fools and sots,                                                30
Such boast to make,
To prate and crake,
To face, to brace,<4>
All void of grace,
So proud of heart,
So overthwart,
So out of frame,
So void of shame,
As it is enrolled,
Written and told                                               40
Within this quaire?
Who list to repair,
And therein read,
Shall find indeed
A mad reckoning,
Considering all thing,
That the Scots may sing
Fie on the winning!

When the Scot Lived

Jolly Jemmy, ye scornful Scot,
Is it come unto your lot                                       50
A solemn sumner for to be?
It greeth nought for your degree
Our king of England for to cite,<5>
Your sovereign lord, our prince of might:
Ye for to send such a citation,
It shameth all your naughty nation,
In comparison but king Kopping<6>
Unto our prince, anointed king.
Ye play Hob Lobbyn of Lowdean;<7>
Ye show right well what good ye can;<8>                        60
Ye may be lord of Locrian<9>-
Christ cense you with a frying-pan!-
Of Edinburgh and Saint John's town:<10>
Adieu, Sir Sumner, cast off your crown!

When the Scot was Slain

Continually I shall remember
The merry month of September,
With the ix <11> day of the same,
For then began our mirth and game;
So that now I have devised,
And in my mind I have comprised,                               70
Of the proud Scot, King Jemmy,
To write some little tragedy,
For no manner consideration
Of any sorrowful lamentation,
But for the special consolation
Of all our royal English nation.

Melpomene, O muse tragedial,
Unto your grace for grace now I call
To guide my pen and my pen to imbibe!
Illumine me, your poet and your scribe,                        80
That with mixture of aloes and bitter gall
I may compound confectures for a cordial,
To anger the Scots and Irish<12> caterans withal,
That late were discomfect with battle martial.

Thalia, my Muse, for you also call I,
To touch them with taunts of your harmony,
A medley to make of mirth with sadness,
The hearts of England to comfort with gladness:
And now to begin I will me address,
To you rehearsing the sum of my process.                       90

King Jamey, Jemmy, Jocky my jo,<13>
Ye summoned our king,-why did ye so?
To you nothing it did accord
To summon our king, your sovereign lord.
A king, a sumner! it was great wonder:
Know ye not sugar and salt asunder?
Your sumner too saucy, too malapert,
Your herald in arms not yet half expert.
Ye thought ye did yet valiantly,
Not worth three skips of a pie:<14>                           100
Sir Skyrgaliard,<15> ye were so skit,
Your will then ran before your wit.

Your liege ye laid and your ally,
Your frantic fable not worth a fly,
French king, or one or other;
Regarded ye should your lord, your brother.<16>
Trowed ye, Sir Jemmy, his noble Grace
From you, Sir Scot, would turn his face?
With, Gup, Sir Scot of Galloway!
Now is your pride fall to decay.                              110
Maleured was your false intent
For to offend your president,
Your sovereign lord most reverent,
Your lord, your brother, and your regent.

In him is figured Melchizedek,
And ye were disloyal Amalek.
He is our noble Scipion,
Anointed king; and ye were none,
Though ye untruly your father have slain.<17>
His title is true in France to reign;                         120
And ye, proud Scot, Dundee, Dunbar,<18>
Pardie, ye were his homager,
And suitor to his parliament:
For your untruth now are ye shent.
Ye bear yourself somewhat too bold,
Therefore ye lost your copyhold;
Ye were bond tenant to his estate;
Lost is your game, ye are checkmate.

Unto the castle of Norham,<19>
I understand, too soon ye came.                               130
At Brankston Moor and Flodden hills,
Our English bows, our English bills,
Against you gave so sharp a shower,<20>
That of Scotland ye lost the flower.
The White Lion, there rampant of mood,
He raged and rent out your heart-blood;
He the White, and ye the Red,<21>
The White there slew the Red stark dead.
Thus for your guerdon quit are ye,
Thanked be God in Trinity,                                    140
And sweet Saint George, Our Lady's knight!<22>
Your eye is out: adieu, good-night!

Ye were stark mad to make a fray,
His Grace being out of the way:<23>
But, by the power and might of God,
For your own tail ye made a rod!
Ye wanted wit, sir, at a word;
Ye lost your spurs, ye lost your sword.<24>
Ye might have busked you to Huntley Banks;<25>
Your pride was peevish to play such pranks:                   150
Your poverty could not attain
With our king royal war to maintain.

Of the king of Naverne ye might take heed,
Ungraciously how he doth speed:
In double dealing so he did dream,
That he is king without a ream;
And, for example ye would none take,<26>
Experience hath brought you in such a brake.
Your wealth, your joy, your sport, your play,
Your bragging boast, your royal array,                        160
Your beard so brim<27> as boar at bay, 
Your Seven Sisters, that gun so gay,<28>
All have ye lost and cast away.
Thus Fortune hath turned you, I dare well say,
Now from a king to a clot of clay:
Out of your robes ye were shaked,
And wretchedly ye lay stark naked.
For lack of grace hard was your hap:
The Popes curse gave you that clap.<29>

Of the out isles the rough-footed Scots,<30>                  170
We have well-eased them of the bots:
The rude rank Scots, like drunken dranes,<31>
At English bows have fetched their banes.
It is not fitting in tower and town
A sumner to wear a king's crown:
Fortune on you therefore did frown;
Ye were too high, ye are cast down.
Sir Sumner, now where is your crown?
Cast off your crown, cast up your crown!
Sir Sumner, now ye have lost your crown.                      180

Quod Skelton Laureate, orator to the King's most royal estate.

Scotia, reducta in formam provinciae,
Regis parebit nutibus Angliae; <32>
Alioquin, per desertum Sin, super cherubim,
Cherubim, seraphim, seraphimque, ergo, &c. <33>



NOTES TO AGAINST THE SCOTS.

1. The battle of Flodden, one of the most disastrous events in
Scottish history, has been rendered so familiar to readers of our
own day by the poem of Marmion, that a particular account of it
here is unnecessary. It took place on September 9th, 1513. The
English army was commanded by the Earl of Surrey (created Duke of
Norfolk the February following); the Scottish by their rash and
gallant monarch James the Fourth, who perished in the field amid
heaps of his slaughtered nobles and gentlemen.

2. Lo, these fond sots, &c.]-fond, i.e. foolish. This passage
resembles a rhyme made in reproach of the Scots in the reign of
Edward the First:

"These scaterand Scots
Hold we for sots," &c.
Fabyan's Chron. vol. ii. fol. 140. ed. 1559.

3. closed in lead] The body of James, disfigured with wounds, was
found the day after the battle; it was carried to Berwick, and 
ultimately interred in the priory of Shene: see Weever's Anc. Fun.
Mon., p. 394. ed. 1631. After the dissolution of that house,
according to Stow's account, the body, enclosed in lead, was
thrown into one of the lumber rooms; and the head, which some
workmen hewed off "for their foolish pleasure," was brought to
London and buried in St. Michael's Church, Wood Street: Survey, B.
iii. 81. ed. 1720.

4. To face, to brace] So Borde in his Book of Knowledge introduces
a Scotchman saying,

"I will boost my self, I will crake and face."
Sig. G 2. reprint.

Compare our author's Magnificence;

"Cl. Col.: By God, I tell you, I will not be out-faced.
By the mass, I warrant thee, I will not be braced."
v. 2247.

and his Garland of Laurel;

"Some facers, some bracers, some make great cracks."
v. 189.

In Hormanni Vulgaria we find, "He faceth the matter, and maketh
great crakes. Tragice loquitur, et ampullosa verba proiicit." Sig.
P. iiii. ed. 1530. "He is not afeared to face or brace with any
man of worship. Nullius viri magnitudinem allatrare dubitat." Sig.
O ii. And in Palsgrave, p. 542, "I face, as one doth that brawleth
or falleth out with another to make him afraid, Je contrefays des
mines . . . I dare not pass by his door, he faceth and braceth me
so: . . il contrefayt tellement des mines." 'I Brace or face, Je
braggue. He braced and made a bracing here afore the door as
though he would have killed . . . Il braggoyt," &c. p. 462.

5. Our king of England for to cite] While Henry viii. was encamped
before Terouenne, James iv. sent his chief herald to him, with a
letter (which may be found in Hall's Chron. (Hen. viii.), fol.
xxix. ed. 1548), reckoning up the various injuries and insults he
had received from Henry, and containing what amounted to a
declaration of war, unless the English monarch should desist from
hostilities against the French king.

6. king Kopping] Compare the Coliphizacio, where Caiaphas
exclaims-

"Therefore I shall thee name that ever shall rue thee, 
King Copyn in our game," &c.
Towneley Mysteries, p. 194,

the Glossary informing us that "A coppin is a certain quantity of
worsted yarn wound on a spindle, and the spindle then extracted,"-
which may be true, though it does not explain the passage. Some
game must be alluded to.

7. Hob Lobbyn of Lowdean] So again our author in Speak, Parrot;

"Hob Lobyn of Lowdean would have a bit of bread."
v. 74.

Perhaps there is an allusion to some song or ballad: Lowdean is, I
apprehend, Lothian.

8. what good ye can] i.e. what manners you know.]

9. Locrian] i.e Loch Ryan a large bay in Wigtonshire, which, by
approximating to the bay of Luce, forms the peninsula called the
Rinns of Galloway. It is mentioned by Barbour;

"And at Lochrian in Galloway
He shipped, with all his men."
The Bruce, B. xi. v. 36. ed. Jam.

In the poem The Doughty Duke of Albany Skelton speaks of the Scots

"Of Locryan,
And the ragged ray
Of Galloway."
v. 21.

and in his verses against Dundas, he calls him "Dundas of
Galloway." v. 29. See too v. 109 of the present poem. Our author
uses Scottish names at random.

10. Saint John's town] i.e. Perth. Compare Langtoft's Chronicle,
p. 333, ed. Hearne; Minot's Poems, p. 6. ed. Ritson; and Barbour's
Bruce, B. v. 53. ed. Jam. It is said that the Picts, after their
conversion to Christianity, or the Scots, after their king had
succeeded to the Pictish throne, consecrated the church and bridge
of Perth to St. John the Baptist; and that hence in process of
time many persons gave to the town the name of St. Johnston: see
Jamieson's note on the passage last referred to.

11. the ix] Eds. "xi".

12. Irish caterans] Irish, i.e. Highlanders and Islesmen:

"Than girt he all the Irishry
That were in till his company,
Of Argyll, and the Isles also," &c.
Barbour's Bruce, B. xiii. v. 233. ed. Jam.

Caterans (see Jamieson's Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang. in v. Cateranes)
i.e. marauders who carried off cattle, corn, &c.

13. Jocky my jo] Perhaps a fragment of some song or ballad. In
Scotch, Jocky is the diminutive of Jock, the abbreviation of John:
jo is sweetheart, dear, (joy).

14. pie] i.e. magpie

15. Sir Skyrgaliard] So again our author in his Speak, Parrot;

"With Skyrgaliard, proud palliard, vauntparler, ye prate."
v. 427.

and in his poem The Doughty Duke of Albany;

"Such a skyrgaliard."
v. 168.

"William Johnstone of Wamphray, called the Gaillard, was a noted
freebooter . . . His nom de guerre seems to have been derived from
the dance called The Galliard. The word is still used in Scotland
to express an active, gay, dissipated character." Scott's Minst.
of the Scott. Bord. i. 305. ed. 1810. To skir (under which
Richardson in his Dict. cites Skelton's term "a skyrgaliard") is
to scour, to move rapidly.

16. brother] James married Margaret sister of Henry the Eighth.

17. Though ye untruly your father have slain] James iii. was slain
by a ruffian whose name is not certainly known, under
circumstances of great atrocity, in 1488, in a miller's cottage,
immediately after his flight from the battle of Sauchieburn, where
his son (then in his 17th year) had appeared in arms against him.
The mind of James iv. was haunted by remorse for his father's
death; and he wore in penance an iron girdle, the weight of which
he every year increased.

18. Dundee, Dunbar] Scottish names used at random: so again in our
author's Verses Against Dundas, "Dundee, Dunbar," v. 60. and in
his poem The Doughty Duke of Albany "Dunbar, Dundee," v. 24.

19. the castle of Norham] In taking the Castle of Norham, James
wasted some days, previous to the battle of Flodden, while he
ought to have employed his forces in more important enterprises.

20. Against you gave so sharp a shower] Shower is often applied by
our old writers to the storm, assault, encounter of battle:

"The sharp showers and the cruel rage
Abide fully of this mortal war."
Lydgate's Wars of Troy, B. iv. sig. Y iiii. ed. 1555.

"He was slawe in sharp shower."
Kyng Robert of Sicily,-MS. Harl. 1701. fol. 94.

and see our author's poem The Doughty Duke of Albany v. 240.

21. The White Lyon, there rampant of mood,
He raged and rent out your heart blood;
He the White, and ye the Red] The White Lion was the badge of the
Earl of Surrey, derived from his ancestors the Mowbrays. His arms
were Gules, on a bend between six cross croslets, fitchy, argent:
after the battle of Flodden, the king granted to him "an
honourable augmentation of his arms, to bear on the bend thereof:
in an escutcheon Or, a demi Lion rampant, pierced through the
mouth with an arrow, within a double tressure flory and counter
fory Gules; which tressure is the same as surrounds the royal arms
of Scotland." Collins's Peerage, i. 77. ed. Brydges.

"If Scotland's Coat no mark of Fame can lend,
That Lion plac'd in our bright silver-bend,
Which as a Trophy beautifies our shield,
Since Scottish blood discoloured Floden-Field; 
When the proud Cheviot our brave Ensign bare, 
As a rich Jewel in a Lady's hair,
And did fair Bramston's neighbouring values choke 
With clouds of Canons fire-disgorged smoke."
Epistle from H. Howard Earl of Surrey to Geraldine,-Drayton's
Poems, p. 86 [88],ed. 8vo. n. d.

"George Buchanan reporteth that the Earl of Surrey gave for his
badge a Silver Lion, which from Antiquity belonged to that name,
tearing in pieces a Lion prostrate Gules; and withal, that this
which he terms insolence, was punished in Him and his Posterity,"
&c. Drayton's note on the preceding passage.

the Red - The royal arms of Scotland.

22. sweet Saint George, our Lady's knight] "Our Lady's knight" is
the common designation of St. George: so in a song written about
the same time the present poem, Cott. MS. Domit. A. xviii. fol.
248; in Sir Bevis of Hamtoun, p. 102. Maitl. ed. &c. &c.

23. His grace being out of the way] i.e. Henry the Eighth being in
France: see note 5 above

24. ye lost your sword] The sword and dagger, worn by James at the
battle of Flodden, are preserved in the college of Heralds. An
engraving of them is prefixed to Weber's ed. of the poem, Flodden
Field.

25. Huntley Banks] So again in our author's Verses against Dundas;

"That prates and pranks
On Huntley banks."
v. 57.

and in his Why come ye not to Court;

"They [the Scots] play their old pranks 
After Huntley Banks."
v. 263.

and in his poem The Doughty Duke of Albany;

"Of the Scots rank
Of Huntley Bank."
v. 18.

Here again Skelton uses a Scottish name at random. The
Huntleybank, where, according to the charming old poem, Thomas the
Rhymer met the Queen of Faery, is situated on one of the Eldoun
hills.

26. Of the king of Naverne ye might take heed,
Ungraciously how he doth speed:
In double dealing so he did dream
That he is king without a ream;
And, for example ye would none take.]-Naverne i.e Navarre; ream,
i.e. realm. In a letter despatched from the camp before Terouenne,
in answer to the epistle of the Scottish king, (see note 5 above),
Henry says; "And if the example of the king of Navarre being
excluded from his realm for assistance given to the French king
cannot restrain you from this unnatural dealing, we suppose ye
shall have like assistence of the said French king as the king of
Navarre hath now: Who is a king without a realm, &c." Hall's
Chron. (Henry viii.) fol. xxxi. ed. 1548. James, however, never
received this letter: he was slain before the herald who bore it
could procure a passage from Flanders.

27. Your beard so brim] James wore "his Beard something long."
Leland; Collect. iv. 285. ed. 1770.

28. Your Seven Sisters, that gun so gay] Lindsay of Pitscottie
informs us that when James was making preparations for his fatal
expedition against England, "he had seven great cannons out of the
castle of Edinburgh, quhilkis was called the Seven Sisters, cast
by Robert Borthik; and three master gunners, furnished with powder
and lead to them at their pleasure."' Cron. of Scotl. i. 266. ed.
1814. These cannons were named Sisters because they were all of
the same great size and fine fabric. Concerning Borthwick, master
of the artillery to James, the following mention is made by
Lesley: "Rex amplo stipendio Robertum Borthuik, insignem tormenti
fabricandi artificem donavit, ut tormenta bellica maiora in arce
Edinburgensi aliquamdiu conflaret: quorum per multa hodie in
Scotia reperiuntur, hoc versa incisa:
"Machina sum. Scoto Borthuik fabricata Roberto." ("Robert
Borthwick, well paid by the king, who gave him a commission to
make cannon, so that with this great cannon he should demolish the
castle of Edinburgh: which can be seen by many in Scotland today
with this inscription: 'I am a machine made by Robert Borthwick
the Scot'") De or. mor. et reb. gest. Scot. p. 353. ed. 1578.

29. The Pope's curse done you that clap]-clap, i.e. stroke. James
died under a recent sentence of excommunication for infringing the
pacification with England.

30. Of the out isles the rough footed Scots] i.e. the rough-footed
Scots of the Hebrides: the epithet rough footed was given to them,
because they wore, during the frost, a rude sort of shoe, made of
undressed deer-skin, with the hairy side outwards; see MS. quoted
in Pinkerton's Hist. of Scotland, ii. 397.

31. drunken dranes]-dranes, i.e. drones. The Editor of Skelton's
Works, 1736, printed "dronken Danes;" and Weber (Flodden Field, p.
276) proposes the same alteration; but though the Danes (as the
readers of our early dramatists know) were notorious for deep
potations, the text is right. Our author has again, in his poem
The Doughty Duke of Albany;

"We set not a prane (prawn)
By such a drunken drane."
v. 163.

"Drane. Fucus." Prompt. Parv. ed. 1499. And compare Pierce
Plowman's Creed;

"And right as dranes doth nought but drinketh up the honey."
Sig. D i. ed. 1561.

32. fitting] Other eds. "sitting", which, perhaps, Skelton wrote,
as he elsewhere uses the word.

33. Scotia, reducta in formam provinciae,
Regis parebit nutibus Angliae;] "Scotland reduced to a province,
its king will be seen to be at the nod of the English"

34. Alioquin, per desertum Sin, super cherubim,
Cherubim, seraphim, seraphimque, ergo, &c] "Otherwise, through the
desert of Sin, above the Cherubim, Cherubim, and Seraphim,
seraphim";. per desertum Sin is a reference to Exodus. xvi. 1
"Profectique sunt de Elim, et venit omnis multitudo filiorum
Israel in desertum Sin, quod est inter Elim et Sinai," ("And they
set forward from Elim, and all the multitude of the children of
Israel came into the desert of Sin, which is between Elim and
Sinai")



UNTO DIVERS PEOPLE THAT REMORD THIS RHYMING AGAINST THE
SCOT JEMMY.

I am now constrained,
With words nothing feigned,
This invective to make,
For some peoples' sake
That list for to jangle
And waywardly to wrangle
Against this my making,
Their males thereat shaking,
At it reprehending,
And venomously stinging,                                       10
Rebuking and remording,
And nothing according.

Cause have they none other,
But for that he was brother,
Brother unnatural
Unto our king royal,
Against whom he did fight
Falsely against all right,
Like that untrue rebel
False Cain against Abel.                                       20

Whoso thereat picketh mood,
The tokens are not good
To be true English blood;
For, if they understood
His traitorly despite,
He was a recreant knight,
A subtle schismatic,
Right near an heretic,
Of grace out of the state,
And died excommunicate.                                        30

And for he was a king,
The more shameful reckonfng
Of him should men report,
In earnest and in sport.
He scantly loveth our king,
That grudgeth at this thing:
That cast such overthwarts
Perchance have hollow hearts.

Si veritatem dico, quare non creditis mihi?<1>



NOTES TO UNTO DIVERS PEOPLE THAT REMORD THIS RHYMING

1. Si veritatem dico, quare non creditis mihi?] "If I speak truth,
why do you not believe me?"



VERSES AGAINST DUNDAS

VILITISSIMUS SCOTUS DUNDAS ALLEGAT CAUDAS CONTRA ANGLIGENAS <1>

<2>

[This poem from Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568.]

Caudatos Anglos, spurcissime Scote, quid effers?
Effrons es, quoque sons, mendax, tua spurcaque bucca est.<3>

Anglicus a tergo
caudam gerit;
est canis ergo.
Anglice caudate,
cape caudam
ne cadat a te.
Ex causa caudae
manet Anglica
gens sine laude.<4>

Diffamas patriam, qua non
est melior usquam.
Cum cauda plaudis dum
possis, ad ostia pultas
Mendicans; mendicus eris,
mendaxque bilinguis,
Scabidus, horribilis, quem
vermes sexque pedales
Corrodunt misere; miseris
genus est maledictum<5>

Skelton, nobilis poeta.<6>

Gup, Scot,
Ye blot:
Laudate
Caudate,<7>
Set in better
Thy pentameter.
This Dundas,
This Scottish ass,
He rhymes and rails
That Englishmen have tails.<8>                                 10

Skeltonus laureatus,
Anglicus natus,
Provocat Musas
Contra Dundas
Spurcissimum Scotum,
Undique notum,
Rustice fotum,
Vapide potum. <9>
Skelton laureate
After this rate                                                20
Defendeth with his pen
All English men
Against Dundas,
That Scottish ass.
Shake thy tail, Scot, like a cur,
For thou beggest at every man's door.
Tut, Scot, I say,
Go shake thy dog, hey!<10>
Dundas of Galloway
With thy versifying rails                                      30
How they have tails.
By Jesu Christ,
False Scot, thou liest:
But behind in our hose
We bear there a rose
For thy Scottish nose,
A spectacle case
To cover thy face,
With trey deuce ace.
A toolman to blot<11>                                          40
A rough footed Scot!
Dundas, sir knave,
Why dost thou deprave
This royal ream,
Whose radiant beam
And relucent light
Thou hast in despite,
Thou dunghill knight?
But thou lackest might,
Dundas, drunken and drowsy,
Scabbedd, scurvy, and lousy,                                   50
Of unhappy generation
And most ungracious nation.
Dundas,
That drunk ass,
That rates and ranks,
That prates and pranks
Of Huntly-banks,<12>
Take this our thanks:-
Dundee, Dunbar,<13>                                            60
Walk, Scot,
Walk, sot,
Rail not too far.



NOTES TO VERSES AGAINST DUNDAS.

1. Vilitissimus Scotus Dundas allegat caudas contra angligenas]
So, perhaps, Skelton wrote; but qy. "Vilissimus?" ("The most
worthless Scot Dundas alleged that the English race had tails")

2. Dundas] "Georgius Dundas, Graece Latineque doctissimus habitus,
Equitum Hierosolymitanorum intra Regnum Scotiae praefectus, sed
prius Aberdonim Professor. Scripsit diligenter, et laboriose.
Historiam Equitum Hierosolymitanorum, lib. ii. Claruit anno MDXX."
Dempsteri Hist. Eccles. Gentis Scotorum, &c. 1627. p. 234.
("George Dundas, greatly learned in Latin and Greek, prefect of
the Knights of Jerusalem in Scotland, professor at Aberdeen
University. He wrote laboriously and diligently. History of the
Knights of Jerusalem book II. He flourished 1520. Dempster,
History of the Scottish Church.") This George Dundas was, I
apprehend, the person who excited the wrath of Skelton.

3. Caudatos Anglos, spurcissime Scote, quid effers? 
Effrons es, quoque sons, mendax, tua spurcaque bucca est]
"'English with tails,' you foulest Scot, what do you say? You are
criminal and shameless, a liar, and your mouth is full of filth."

4. Anglicus a tergo
caudam gerit;
est canis ergo.
Anglice caudate,
cape caudam
ne cadat a te.
Ex causa caudae
manet Anglica
gens sine laude.] "The Englishman has a tail behind, and is
therefore a dog. Tailed Englishman, grab your tail so it does not
fall off. Because of the tails, the English remain a people
without praise." These three hexameters, are, it would seem, the
composition of Dundas.

5. Diffamas patriam, qua non
est melior usquam.
Cum cauda plaudis dum
possis, ad ostia pultas
Mendicans; mendicus eris,
mendaxque bilinguis,
Scabidus, horribilis, quem
vermes sexque pedales
Corrodunt misere; miseris
genus est maledictum.] "You slander our country, than which none
is better. While you can lash your tail, lash yourself out the
door to beg; you will be a beggar, a two-tongued liar, scabby,
horrible, miserably infested with worms six feet long, your
wretched clan accursed."

6. nobilis poeta.] "noble poet." (you knew that, didn't you?)

7. Laudate
Caudate,] "Praise ye those with tails"

8. That Englishmen have tails] "After this Saint Austin entered in
to Dorsetshire, and came in to a town where as were wicked people
& refused his doctrine and preaching utterly & drove him out of
the town casting on him the tails of thornback or like fishes,
wherefore he besought almighty god to show his judgement on them,
and god sent to them a shameful token, for the children that were
born after in that place had tails as it is said, till they had
repented them. It is said commonly that this fell at Stroud in
Kent, but blessed be God at this day is no such deformity." The
life of Saint Austin,-Golden Legend, fol. clxxiiii. ed. 1483. See
too Nova Legenda Angliae (by Capgrave), 1516. fol. xxx.

On the proverbial expression Kentish Long-Tails, Fuller has the
following remarks. "Let me premise, that those are much mistaken
who first found this Proverb on a Miracle of Austin the Monk . . .
I say they are much mistaken, for the Scene of this Lying Wonder
was not laid in any Part of Kent, but pretended many miles off,
nigh Cerne in Dorsetshire. To come closer to the sense of this
Proverb, I conceive it first of outlandish extraction, and cast by
foreigners as a note of disgrace on all the English, though it
chanceth to stick only on the Kentish at this Day. For when there
happened in Palestine a difference betwixt Robert brother of Saint
Lewis King of France and our William Longspee Earl of Salisbury,
hear how the Frenchman insulted over our nation: O timidorum
caudatorum formidolositas! Quam beatrus, quam mundus praesens
foret exercitus, si a caudis purgaretur et caudatis. "O the
cowardliness of these fearful Long-tails! How happy, how clean
would this our army be, were it but purged from tails and Long-
tails". Matthew Paris. Anno Dom. 1250. pag. 790.

That the English were nicked by this speech appears by the reply
of the Earl of Salisbury following still the metaphor; The son of
my father shall press thither to day, whither you shall not dare
to approach his horse tail: Some, will have the English so called
from wearing a pouch or poke, (a bag to carry their baggage in)
behind their backs, whilst probably the Proud Monsieurs had their
Lacqueys for that purpose. In proof whereof they produce ancient
pictures of the English Drapery and Armory, wherein such
conveyances do appear. If so, it was neither sin nor shame for the
common sort of people to carry their own necessaries, and it
matters not much whether the pocket be made on either side, or
wholly behind. If any demand how this nick-name (cut off from the
rest of England) continues still entailed on Kent? The best
conjecture is, because that county lieth nearest to France, and
the French are beheld as the first founders of this aspersion. But
if any will have the Kentish so called from drawing and dragging
boughs of trees behind them, which afterwards they advanced above
their heads and so partly cozened partly threatened King William
the Conqueror to continue their ancient customs, I say, if any
will impute it to this original, I will not oppose." Worthies
(Kent, p. 63), ed. 1662. The preceding passage of Fuller, somewhat
abridged, is copied by Ray into his Proverbs, p. 245. ed. 1768.
For fanciful stories concerning the origin of Kentish long tails,
see also Cornucopiae, Pasquils Night-cap, 1612, (attributed to S.
Rowlands), p. 42. sqq.; and the commencement of Robin Good-fellow,
His mad Pranks and Merry Jests, 1628, (a tract which originally
appeared at an earlier date).

9. Skeltonus laureatus,
Anglicus natus,
Provocat Musas
Contra Dundas
Spurcissimum Scotum,
Undique notum,
Rustice fotum,
Vapide potum] "Skelton the Laureate, an Englishman born, calls on
the Muses against Dundas, that filthiest Scot, who is well known
to be full of boorish drunkenness and hot air."

10. Go shake thy dog, hey] In our author's Magnificence is,

"Go, shake the dog, hay, sith ye will needs."
 v. 306.

and had the expression occurred only in these two passages of
Skelton, I should have felt confident that in the present one
"thy" was a misprint for "thee," and that both were to be
explained-"Go shake thee, dog," &c.; but again, in his poem The
Doughty Duke of Albany we find,

"Twit, Scot, shake thy dog, hey"
v. 159.

11. A toolman to blot] A friend queries "tal man?" but toolman is,
I believe, pen-man: compare our author's third poem Against
Garnesche;

"Had ye gone with me to school,
And occupied no better your tool [i.e. pen]," &c.
v. 117.

also the commencement of the present piece,

"Gup, Scot, 
Ye blot."

12. Huntley Banks] See note 25 to Against the Scots

13. Dundee, Dunbar] See note 18 to Against the Scots



CALLIOPE

[This poem from Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568.]

WHY WERE YE CALLIOPE EMBROIDERED WITH LETTERS OF GOLD?

SKELTON LAUREATE, ORATO. REG., MAKETH THIS ANSWER

CALLIOPE,
As ye may see,
Regent is she
Of poets all,

Which gave to me
The high degree
Laureate to be
Of fame royal;

Whose name enrolled
With silk and gold                                             10
I dare be bold
Thus for to wear.

Of her I hold
And her household;
Though I wax old
And somedeal sere,

Yet is she fain,
Void of disdain,
Me to retain
Her serviture:                                                 20

With her certain
I will remain,
As my sovereign
Most of pleasure,

Maulgre touz malheureux.<1>



NOTES TO CALLIOPE

1. Maulgre touz malheureux] "Despite all unhappiness."



THE BOOK OF THREE FOOLS.

[From Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568.]

<1>

M. SKELTON, POET LAUREATE, GAVE TO MY LORD CARDINAL.

THE FIRST FOOL.

THE man that doth wed a wife
For her goods and her richess,
And not for lineage feminative,<2>
Procureth dolour and distress,
With infinite pain and heaviness;
For she will do him much sorrow,
Both at even and at morrow.

THE SECOND FOOL.

The darts right cursed of Envy
Hath rained sith the world began,
Which bringeth man evidently
Into the bonds of Satan;
Wherefore he is a discreet man
That can eschew that evil sin
Where body and soul is lost in.

THE THIRD FOOL.

Divers by voluptuousness
Of women, the which be present,
Be brought into full great distress,
Forgetting vertues excellent
Of God, the which is permanent,
And suffereth themselves to be bound 
In cords, as it were a hound.

Come hither, and take this book, and read therein for your
learning with clear eyen, and look in this book, that sheweth you
foolish fools without wit or understanding. Pecunious fools, that
be avarice, and for to have good time and to live merrily, weddeth
these old withered women, which hath sacks full of nobles, clarify
here your sight, and ye shall know what goodness cometh thereby,
and what joy and gladness. Some there be that abandoneth
themselves for to gather together the dung that issueth out of
their ass's arse, for to find evermore grease:<3> it is great
folly truly; but yet the young man is more foolisher the which
weddeth an old wife, for to have her gold and silver. I say that
he is a great fool that taketh an old wife for her goods, and is
much to blame.

They the which do so procureth all tribulations; for with her he
shall neither have joy, recreation, nor rest. He nourisheth
strifes and great debates, thought, pain, anguish, and melancholy:
and if he would accomplish the works of marriage, he may not, for
she is so debilite, cold, unpropice, unnatural, and undiscurrent,
for the coldness that is in her. The husband of this old wife hath
none esperance to have lineage by her, for he never loved her. The
man is a very fool to make his demurrance upon such an old wife.
When he thinketh sometime upon such things, he leseth his natural
wit, in cursing himself more then a M. times with the gold and the
silver, and the cursed hazard of Fortune. And when he seeth his
poor life in such distress, his heart is all oppressed with
melancholy and dolour: but when the unhappy man seeth that it is
force, and that he is constrained to have patience, he putteth his
cure to draw to him the money of the old withered woman in making
to her glad cheer. And when he hath the money and the bag with
nobles, God knoweth what cheer he maketh, without thinking on them
that gathered it. And when he hath spent all, he is more unhappier
than he was before. If that the fool be unhappy, it is well right,
for he hath wedded avarice, mother of all evils: if he had taken a
wife that had been fair and young, after his complexion, he had
not fallen into so great an inconvenience. It is written in
ancient books, that he which weddeth a wife by avarice, and not
for to have lineage, hath no cure of the honesty of matrimony, and
thinketh full evil on his conscience. The union of marriage is
decayed; for, under the colour of good and loyal mariage, is
wedded avarice, as we se every day by experience through the
world. And one will have a wife, and that he mark his to be
demanded in marriage, they will enquire of his riches and cunning.
And on the other side he will demand great goods with her, to
nourish her with: for and her father and mother and friends have
no great riches, he will not of her; but an she be rich, he
demandeth none other thing. It is written, that one were better
have his house in desert, whereas no mention should be of him,
than to bide with such wives, for they be replete with all
cursedness. And the poor fool breaketh his heart; he loseth his
soul, and corrupteth his body. He selleth his youth unto the old
wife that weddeth her for avarice, and hath but noise and
dissension, in using his life thus in sin. Consider, you fools,
what servitude ye put your self in, when ye wed such wives. I pray
you be chaste, if that ye will live without unhap. My friends,
which be not in that band, put you not therein, and ye shall be
well happy. Notwithstanding, I defend you not to marry<4>, but I
exhort you to take a wife that ye may have progeny by, and solace
bodily and ghostly, and thereby to win the joys of Paradise.

OF ENVY, THE SECOND FOOL.

Approach, you foolish envious, the which can say no good by them
that ye hate, come and see in this book your perverse and evil
conditions. O envy, that devoureth the conditions of men, and
dissipers of honour! Thou makest to have ravishing hearts
famished; thou brennest the desires, and slayeth the soul in the
end; thou engenderest the dart environed with mischief, that which
travaileth divers folks. Cursed fool, how hast thou thy heart so
replete with cruelty? for, if I have temporal goods, thou wilt
have envy thereat; or, if that I can work well, and that I apply
me unto divers things the which be honest, or if that I have
castles, lands, and tenements, or if that I am exalted unto honour
by my science, or won it by my hardiness truly and justly, or if
that I am beloved of divers persons which reclaimeth me good and
virtuous and of a noble courage, thou wilt vilepend me with thy
words: thou wottest never in what manner thou mayest adnichil mine
honour. Thy malicious heart is hurt with a mortal wound, in such
wise that thou hast no joy nor solace in this world, for the dart
of Envy pierceth thy heart like a spear. Thou hast wild liquor,
the which maketh all thy stomach to be on a flame. There is no
medicine that may heal thy mortal wound. I, being in a place where
as mine honour was magnified, thought for to have taken alliance
with an odiferant flower, but all suddenly I was smitten with a
dart of Envy behind my back, wherethrough all they that were on my
party turned their backs upon me, for to agree to one of Venus'
dissolute servants, proceeding from a heart envenomed with envy.
Wherefore I shall specify unto you the conditions of the envious.
Who that holdeth him of the subjects of Envy, she constitueth to
devour and bite every body; giving unhaps and miseries unto her
servants. Such folks doth the innocent a thousand wrongs. They be
replenished with so many treasons, that they can not sleep in
their beds; they have no sweet canticles nor songs. They have
their tongues honeyed with sweet words under the colour of love;
they be lean, and infect of rigour these envious, more bitterer
than the gall of the fish glauca<5>, with their eyen beholding a
traverse<6>, of stomachs chafed scintillously, and without their
mouths, as the vine that is new cut, they be environed with rage
and great anguish, beholding evermore to destroy some body.
Conceive the history of Joseph in your minds, the which had vii.
brethren, that were envious against him which was the youngest,
and sold him unto the merchants of Egypt by envy, and betrayed
him; the which were delibered of a long time to have destroyed
him. These envious never laugh but when some good man hath damage
upon the sea or land; or at the disfortune of some body, he
drinketh his blood as milk. Notwithstanding his heart is ever
embraced with envy, and as long as he liveth it shall gnaw his
heart. He resembleth unto Etna which brenneth always. As of
Romulus, and Remus his brother, the which Romulus edified first
Rome, and gave it to name Rome, after his own name. Nevertheless
they were pastors, for they established laws in the city. And
Romulus punished every body equally. He did institute limits or
marks about the city, and ordained that he that passed the limits
should be put to death. His brother passed them, wherefore he was
put unto death incontinent in the same place. We read also how
Cain slew his own brother by envy. Have we not ensample semblably
of Atreus, of whom his brother occupied the park, how well that
they were in the realm strong and puissant, for to defend them? It
was Theseus<7> that expulsed his brother out of the realm by envy,
and was called again because that he had taken the park, and
finally was banished, and by envy and under the colour of peace he
was sent for. And when he was come unto a feast, he made his two
children for to be roasted, and made them to drink their blood. O
what horror was it to see his two children die that were so
discreet! In like wise Ethiocles<8>, if thou wilt be discreet,
good, and wise, fly from Envy, and thou shalt find thy self sound
of body and soul!

OF THE VOLUPTOUSNESS CORPORAL, THE THIRD FOOL.

Right heartily I beseech you, foolish and lecherous people, that
it will please you for to come and make a little collation<9> in
this book; and if there be any thing that I can do for you, I am
all yours both body and goods; for truly I have an ardent desire
to do you some meritorious deed, because that I have ever
frequented your service.

Now hearken what I have found you, cautelous women. They that the
paps be seen all naked, their hair combed and trussed in divers
places marvellously, be unreasonable fools, for they dress them
like voluptuous harlots, that make their hair to appear at their
brows, yellow as fine gold, made in little tresses for to draw
young folk to their love. Some, for to have their goods,
presenteth to them their beds for to take their carnal desires;
and after that they have taken all their disports, they pill them
as an onion. The other, for to have their pleasures mundane,
chooseth them that she loveth best, and maketh signifiance to
them, saying that she is enamoured on them. Thou art a very idiot
so to abandon thy self unto the vile sin of lechery, for thou
lettest thy self be wrapped therein, like as a calf or a sheep is
bound in a cord, in such wise that ye can not unbind your self. O
fool, have aspect unto that which thou committest! for thou
puttest thy poor soul in great danger of damnation eternal; thou
puttest thy goods, thin understanding, and thy joy, unto dolorous
perdition: and for all that ye be in your wor[l]dly pleasures, yet
it is mingled with distress or with misery, great thought or
melancholy. I require thee, leave thy wor[l]dly pleasures, that
endureth no longer than the grass of the field. If you have joy
one only moment, thou shalt have twain of sorrow for it. We read
of Sardanapalus, that for his lechery and libidinosity fell into
hell; the which put himself in the guise of a poor woman: his men,
seeing him so obstinate in that vile sin, slew him, and so
finished he his days for following of his pleasaunce mundane. The
sovereign Creator was more puissant than this wretched sinner. Let
us not apply our self thereto, sith that he punisheth sinners so
asperly; but with all our hearts enforce we our self for to resist
against that vile and abominable sin of lechery, the which is so
full of infection and bitterness, for it distaineth the soul of
man. Flee from the foolish women, that pilleth the lovers unto the
hard bones, and you shall be beloved of God and also of the world.



NOTES TO THE BOOK OF THREE FOOLS

1. This piece is a paraphrase of three portions of Brant's Ship of
Fools: see the Latin version by Locher, Stultifera Navis, ed.
1497,-Uxorem ducere propter opes, ("To take a wife for wealth")
fol. lx., De livore et invidia, (Of bruises and envy") fol. lxi.,
and De voluptate corporali,(Of the pleasures of the flesh") fol.
lviii.: the same sections will be found accompanying Barclay's
Ship of Fools, ed. 1570,--fol. 95, fol. 97, and fol. 92.

2. lineage feminative] i.e. female lineage

3. for to gather together the donge . . . grease] In the Latin of
Locher;

"Arvinam multi quaerunt sub podice asselli:
Et cumulant trullas: stercora vana petunt."
(He searches for grease under the anuses of donkeys
And collects it in a scoop; he searches the excrement in vain")
fol. lx. ed. 1497.

4. I defend you not to marry] i.e. I do not forbid you from
marrying.

5. glauca] Properly glaucus, a kind of fish whose modern name is
unknown. See Topsell Four-f. Beasts (1658) 16 "A fish called
Glaucus, whereof the male swalloweth up all the young ones when
they are endangered and afterwards yieldeth them forth again"-
quoted in OED

6. eyen beholding a traverse] i.e. eyes looking cross, awry.

7. Theseus] Should of course be Thyestes, as in Locher's Latin:
yet Barclay, in his version of the passage, has,

"Atreus' story and Theseus cruel."
The Ship of Fools, fol. 96. [99], ed. 1570.

8. Ethiocles] So written in Locher's Latin for Eteocles; and so
Lydgate,-

"But make your mirror of Ethyocles."
Story of Thebes, Pars Prima, sig. C v. ed. 4to. n.d.

9. collation] Equivalent here, I believe, to comparison.



A REPLICATION AGAINST CERTAIN YOUNG SCHOLARS ABJURED OF
LATE

<1>

Honorificatissimo, amplissimo, longeque reverendissimo in Christo
patri, ac Domino, domino Thomae, &c., tituli sanctae Ceciliae,
sacrosanctae Romanae ecclesiae presbytero, Cardinali meritissimo,
et apostolicae sedis legato, a latereque legato superillustri,
&c., Skeltonis laureatus, ora. reg., humillimum dicit obsequium
cum omni debita reverentia, tanto tamque magnifico digna principe
sacerdotum, totiusque justitiae aequabilissimo moderatore, necnon
praesentis opusculi fautore excellentissimo, &c., ad cujus
auspicatissimam contemplationem, sub memorabili prelo gloriosae
immortalitatis, praesens pagella felicitatur, &c. <2>

ARGUMENTUM

Crassantes nimium, nimium sterilesque labruscas,
Vinea quas Domini Sabaot non sustinet ultra
Laxius expandi, nostra est resecare voluntas<3>

Cum privilegio a rege indulto.<4>

Protestation alway canonically prepensed, professed, and with good
deliberation made, that this little pamphlet, called The
Replication of Skelton Laureate, ora. reg., remording divers
recrayed and much unreasonable errors of certain sophisticate
scholars and reckless young heretics lately abjured, &c., shall
evermore be, with all obsequious readiness, humbly submitted unto
the right discreet reformation of the reverend prelates and much
noble doctors of our Mother Holy Church, &c.

Ad almam Universitatem Cantabrigensem.<5>

Eulogium Consolationis.<6>

Alma parens, O Cantabrigensis,
Cur lacrymaris? Esto, tui sint
Degeneres hi filioli, sed
Non ob inertes, O pia mater,
Insciolos vel decolor esto.
Progenies non nobilis omnis,
Quam tua forsan mamma fovebat.
Tu tamen esto Palladis almae
Gloria pollens plena Minervae,
Dum radiabunt astra polorum:
jamque valeto, meque foveto,
Namque tibi quondam carus alumnus eram.<7>

How young scholars nowadays enbolned with the fly-blown blast of
the much vainglorious pippling wind, when they have delectably
licked a little of the licorous electuary of lusty learning, in
the much studious school-house of scrupulous Philology, counting
themselves clerks excellently informed and transcendingly sped in
much high conning, and when they have once superciliously caught

A little rag of rhetoric,
A less lump of logic,
A piece or a patch of philosophy,
Then forthwith by and by
They tumble so in theology,
Drowned in dregs of divinity,
That they judge themself able to be
Doctors of the chair in the Vintry
At the Three Cranes,<8>
To magnify their names:                                        10
But madly it frames,
For all that they preach and teach
Is further than their wit will reach.
Thus by demerits of their abusion,
Finally they fall to careful confusion
To bear a faggot, or to be enflamed:
Thus are they undone and utterly shamed.

Ergo:
Licet non enclitice,
Tamen enthymematice,
Notandum imprimis,
Ut ne quid nimis.
Tantum pro primo.<9>

Over this, for a more ample process to be further delated and
continued, and of every true Christian man laudably to be
employed, justified, and constantly maintained; as touching the
tetrical theologisation of these demi-divines, and stoical
students, and friskajolly<10> younkerkins, much better bained than
brained, basked and bathed in their wild burbling and boiling
blood, fervently reboiled with the infatuate flames of their
reckless youth and witless wantonness, embraced and interlaced
with a much fantastical frenzy of their insensate sensuality,
surmised unsurely in their perihermenial principles<11>, to prate
and to preach proudly and lewdly, and loudly to lie; and yet they
were but feebly informed in Master Porphyry's<12> problems, and
have waded but weakly in his three manner of clerkly works,
analytical, topical, and logical: howbeit they were puffed so full
of vainglorious pomp and surcudant elation, that pope-holy<13> and
peevish presumption provoked them to publish and to preach to
people imprudent perilously, how it was idolatry to offer to
images of our Blessed Lady, or to pray and go on pilgrimages, or
to make oblations to any images of saints in churches or
elsewhere.

Against which erroneous errors, odious, orgulous, and fly-blown
opinions, &c.,

To the honour of our Blessed Lady,
And her most Blessed Baby,
I purpose for to reply                                         20
Against this horrible heresy
Of these young heretics, that stink unbrent,
Whom I now summon and content,<14>
That lewdly have their time spent
In their study abominable,
Our glorious Lady to disable,
And heinously on her to babble
With language detestable;
With your lips polluted
Against Her Grace disputed,                                    30
Which is the most clear crystal
Of all pure cleanness virginal,
That our Saviour bare,
Which us redeemed from care.

I say, thou mad March hare,
I wonder how ye dare
Open your jangling jaws,
To preach in any clause,
Like prating popping daws,<15>
Against her excellence,                                        40
Against her reverence,
Against her pre-eminence,
Against her magnificence,
That never did offence.

Ye heretics recrayed,
Wot ye what ye said
Of Mary, mother and maid?
With bawdry at her ye brayed;
With bawdy words unmeet
Your tongues were too fleet;                                   50
Your sermon was not sweet;
Ye were nothing discreet;
Ye were in a drunken heat.
Like heretics confettered,
Ye count yourselves well-lettered:
Your learning is stark nought,
For shamefully ye have wrought,
And to shame yourself have brought.

Because ye her misnamed,
And would have her defamed,                                    60
Your madness she attamed;
For ye were worldly shamed
At Paul's Cross openly,
All men can testify.
There, like a sort of sots,
Ye were fain to bear faggots;
At the feast of her Conception
Ye suffered such correction.

Sive per aequivocum,
Sive per univocum,                                             70
Sive sic, sive not so,<16>
Ye are brought to, Lo, lo, lo!
See where the heretics go,
Witless, wandering to and fro!
With Te he, ta ha, bo ho, bo ho!<17>
And such wanderings many mo.
Helas, ye wretches, ye may be woe!
Ye may sing well-a-way,
And curse both night and day
When ye were bred and born,                                    80
And when ye were priests shorn,
Thus to be laughed to scorn,
Thus tattered and thus torn,
Thorough your own folly,
Ye be blown with the fly
Of horrible heresy.
Fain ye were to reny,
And mercy for to cry,
Or be brent by and by,
Confessing how ye did lie                                      90
In preaching shamefully.

Yourself thus ye discured
As clerkes unassured,
With ignorance obscured.
Ye are unhappily ured.
In your dialectical<18>
And principles syllogistical,
If ye to remembrance call
How syllogisari
Non est ex particulari,                                       100
Neque negativis, 
Recte concludere si vis,
Et caetera, id genus?<19>
Ye could not corde tenus,<20>
Nor answer verbo tenus,<21>
When prelacy you opposed;
Your hearts then were hosed,<22>
Your relations reposed;
And yet ye supposed
Respondere ad quantum.<23>                                    110
But ye were confuse tantum,<24>
Surrendering your suppositions,
For there ye missed your cushions.

Would God, for your own ease,
That wise Harpocrates<25>
Had your mouths stopped,
And your tongues cropped,
When ye logic chopped,
And in the pulpit hopped,
And foolishly there fopped,                                   120
And porishly forth popped
Your schismaticate saws
Against God's laws,
And showed yourselves daws! 
Ye argued arguments,
As it were upon the elenches,
De rebus apparentibus
Et non existentibus;<26>
And ye would appear wise,
But ye were foolish nice:                                     130
Yet by means of that vice
Ye did provoke and 'tice,
Oftener than once or twice,
Many a good man
And many a good woman,
By way of their devotion
To help you to promotion,
Whose charity well regarded
Cannot be unrewarded.

I say it for no sedition,                                     140
But under patient tuition,
It is half a superstition
To give you exhibition
To maintains with your schools,
And to prove yourself such fools.

Some of you had ten pound,
Therewith for to be found
At the university,
Employed which might have be
Much better other ways.                                       150
But, as the man says,
The blind eateth many a fly:
What may be meant hereby
Ye may soon make construction
With right little instruction;
For it is an ancient bruit,
Such apple-tree, such fruit.
What should I prosecute,
Or more of this to clatter?
Return we to our matter.                                      160

Ye soared over-high
In the hierarchy
Of Jovenian's heresy,
Your names to magnify, 
Among the scabbed skies
Of Wycliff's flesh-flies;
Ye stringed so Luther's lute
That ye dance all in a suit
The heretics' ragged ray,
That brings you out of the way                                170
Of Holy Church's lay;
Ye shail inter enigmata 
And inter paradigmata,<27>
Marked in your cradles
To bear faggots for baubles.

And yet some men say
How ye are this day,
And be now as ill,
And so ye will be still,
As ye were before.                                            180
What should I reckon more?

Men have you in suspicion
How ye have small contrition
Of that ye have miswrought:
For, if it were well sought,
One of you there was
That laughed when he did pass
With his faggot in procession;
He counted it for no correction,
But with scornful affection                                   190
Took it for a sport,
His heresy to support;
Whereat a thousand gazed,
As people half-amazed,
And thought in him small grace
His folly so to face.

Some judged in this case
Your penance took no place,
Your penance was too light;
And thought, if ye had right,                                 200
Ye should take further pain
To resort again
To places where ye have preached,
And your lollardy learning teached,
And there to make relation
In open predication,
And knowledge your offence
Before open audience,
How falsely ye had surmised,
And devilishly devised                                        210
The people to seduce,
And chase them through the mews
Of your naughty counsel,
To hunt them into hell
With blowing out your horns,
Full of mockish scorns,
With chating and recheating,<28>
And your busy prating.
Of the gospel and the 'pistles
Ye pick out many thistles,                                    220
And brimly with your bristles
Ye cobble and ye clout
Holy Scripture so about
That people are in doubt
And fear lest they be out
Of all good Christian order.
Thus all thing ye disorder
Throughout every border.

It had been much better
Ye had never learned letter,                                  230
For your ignorance is greater,
I make you fast and sure,
Than all your literature.
Ye are but lither logici,<29>
But much worse isagogici,<30>
For ye have induced a sect
With heresy all infect;
Wherefore ye are well checked,
And by Holy Church correct,
And in manner as abject,                                      240
For evermore suspect,
And banished in effect
From all honest company,
Because ye have eaten a fly,
To your great villany,
That never more may die.

Come forth, ye pope-holy,
Full of melancholy;
Your mad hypocrisy,
And your idiocy,                                              250
And your vainglory,
Have made you eat the fly,
Puffed full of heresy,
To preach it idolatry
Whoso doth magnify
That glorious maid Mary;
That glorious maid and mother,
So was there never another
But that princess alone,
To whom we are bound each one                                 260
The image of her grace
To reverence in every place.

I say, ye brainless beasts,
Why jangle you such jests,
In your divinity
Of Luther's affinity,
To the people of lay fee,<31>
Railing in your rages
To worship none images,
Nor do pilgrimages?                                           270
I say, ye devilish pages,
Full of such dotages,
Count ye yourself good clerks,
And snapper in such works?

Saint Gregory and Saint Ambrose,
Ye have read them, I suppose,
Saint Jerome and Saint Austen,
With other many holy men,
Saint Thomas de Aquino,
With other doctors many mo,                                   280
Which de latria<32> do treat;
They say how latria is an honour great
Belonging to the Deity:
To this ye needs must agree.

But, I trow, yourself ye oversee
What longeth to Christ's humanity.
If ye have read de hyperdulia,
Then ye know what betokeneth dulia:<33>
Then shall ye find it firm and stable,
And to our faith much agreeable,                              290
To worship images of saints.
Wherefore make ye no more restraints,
But mend your minds that are mazed;
Or else doubtless ye shall be blazed,
And be brent at a stake,
If further business that ye make.
Therefore I advise you to forsake
Of heresy the devilish schools,
And cry Godmercy, like frantic fools.

Tantum pro secundo. <34>

Peroratio ad nuper abjuratos quosdam hypotheticos hereticos,
&c.<35>

Audite, viri Ismaelitae, non dico Israelitae;
Audite, inquam, viri Madianitae, Ascalonitae ;
Ammonitae, Gabaonitae, audite verba que loquar.<36>

Opus evangelii est cibus perfectorum;
Sed quia non estis de genere bonorum,
Qui caterisatis categorias cacodaemoniorum,
Ergo
Et reliqua vestra problemata, schemata,
Dilemmata, sinto anathemata!
Ineluctabile argumentum est.<37>

A confutation responsive, or an inevitably prepensed answer to all
wayward or froward altercations that can or may be made or
objected against Skelton Laureate, deviser of this Replication,
&c.

Why fall ye at debate                                         300
With Skelton Laureate,
Reputing him unable
To gainsay replicable
Opinions detestable
Of heresy execrable?

Ye say that poetry
May not fly so high
In theology,
Nor analogy,
Nor philology,                                                310
Nor philosophy,
To answer or reply
Against such heresy?

Wherefore by and by,
Now consequently,
I call to this reckoning
David, that royal king,
Whom Hieronymus,
That doctor glorious,
Doth both write and call                                      320
Poet of poets all,
And prophet principal.

This may not be remorded,
For it is well recorded
In his epistle ad Paulinum,
Presbyterium divinum,<38>
Where word for word ye may
Read what Jerome there doth say:

David, inquit, Simonides noster, Pindarus, et Alcaeus, Flaccus
quoque, Catullus, atque Serenus, Christum lyra personat, et in
decachordo psalterio ab inferis excitat resurgentem. Haec Hier.
<39>

THE ENGLISH

King David the prophet, of prophets principal,
Of poets chief poet, Saint Jerome doth write,                 330
Resembled to Simonides, that poet lyrical
Among the Greeks most relucent of light,
In that faculty which shined as Phoebus bright:
Like to Pindarus in glorious poetry,
Like unto Alcaeus, he doth him magnify.
Flaccus nor Catullus with him may not compare,
Nor solemn Serenus,<40> for all his harmony
In metrical muses, his harping we may spare;
For David, our poet, harped so melodiously
Of our Saviour Christ in his decachord psaltery,              340
That at his resurrection he harped out of hell
Old patriarchs and prophets in heaven with him to dwell.

Return we to our former process.

Then, if this noble king
Thus can harp and sing
With his harp of prophecy
And spiritual poetry,
As Saint Jerome saith,
To whom we must give faith,
Warbling with his strings
Of such theological things,                                   350
Why have ye then disdain
At poets, and complain
How poets do but feign?

Ye do much great outrage,
For to disparage
And to discourage
The fame matriculate
Of poets laureate.

For if ye sadly look,
And wisely read the Book                                      360
Of Good Advertisement,
With me ye must consent<41>
And infallibly agree
Of necessity,
How there is a spiritual,
And a mysterial,
And a mystical
Effect energial,
As Greekes do it call,
Of such an industry,                                          370
And such a pregnancy,
Of heavenly inspiration
In laureate creation,
Of poets commendation,
That of divine miseration
God maketh his habitation
In poets which excels,
And sojourns with them and dwells.

By whose inflammation
Of spiritual instigation                                      380
And divine inspiration
We are kindled in such fashion
With heat of the Holy Ghost
Which is God of mights most,
That he our pen doth lead,
And maketh in us such speed
That forthwith we must need
With pen and ink proceed,
Sometime for affection,
Sometime for sad direction,                                   390
Sometime for correction,
Sometime under protection
Of patient sufferance,
With sober circumstance,
Our minds to advance
To no man's annoyance;
Therefore no grievance,
I pray you, for to take
In this that I do make
Against these frenetics,                                      400
Against these lunatics,
Against these schismatics,
Against these heretics,
Now of late abjured,
Most unhappily ured:
For be ye well-assured
That frenzy, nor jealously,
Nor heresy will never die.

Dixi
iniquis, Nolite inique agere; et delinquentibus, Nolite exaltare
cornu. <42>

Tantum pro tertio. <43>

De raritate poetarum, deque gymnosophistarum, philosophorum,
theologorum, caeterorumque, eruditorum infinita numerositate,
Skel. L. epitoma. <44>

Sunt infiniti, sunt innumerique sophistae,
Sunt infiniti, sunt innumerique logistae,
Innumeri sunt philosophi, sunt theologique,
Sunt infiniti doctores, suntque magistri
Innumeri; sed sunt pauci rarique poetae.
Hinc omne est rarum carum: reor ergo poetas
Ante alios omnes divino flamine flatos.
Sic Plato divinat, divinat sicque Socrates;
Sic magnus Macedo, sic Caesar, maximus heros
Romanus, celebres semper coluere poetas.<45>

Thus endeth the Replication of Skel. L. &c.



NOTES TO A REPLICATION &C.

1. These were Thomas Bilney and Thomas Arthur, Cambridge scholars
who recanted their Lutheran Protestantism and carried their faggot
of repentance at St. Paul's Cross on 29th September 1527. See the
Ex-Classics edition of Foxe's Book of Martyrs, Chapter 171-Thomas
Bilney, at http://www.exclassics.com/foxe/foxe172.htm, for full
details.

2. Honorificatissimo &c.] "To the most honourable, most mighty,
and by far the most reverend father in Christ and in the Lord,
Lord Thomas, &c., of the title of the sacred Cecilian, presbyter
of the Holy Roman Church, the most deserving cardinal, Legate of
the Apostolic See, and the most illustrious legate a latere, &c.,
Skelton Laureate, ora. reg., declares humble allegiance with all
fit reverence due to such a great and magnificent Chief of
Priests, most equitable moderator of all justice, and moreover the
most excellent patron of the present little book, &c., at whose
most auspicious contemplation, under the memorable seal of a
glorious immortality, the present little treatise is commended [or
devised]." (PH). This passage forms the title-page of the original
edition by Pynson, n.d.

3. Crassantes nimium, nimium sterilesque labruscas,
Vinea quas Domini Sabaot non sustinet ultra
Laxius expandi, nostra est resecare voluntas.] "The Lord of hosts
will no longer tolerate these bitter fruited vines, which are
growing too thickly and spreading openly; we will cut them off."

4. Cum privilegio a rege indulto.] "By leave of the King"

5. Ad almam Universitatem Cantabrigensem.] "To the nurturing
University of Cambridge"

6. Eulogium Consolationis.] "A consolatory poem."

7. Alma parens, O Cantabrigensis, &c.] "O Cambridge, nurturing
mother, why should you weep? O pious mother, let it be for these
degenerate offspring, unskilful and ignorant. Not all your
children are noble, whom you have nurtured with your breasts. May
you however have the nurturing of students filled with the muses,
so that they shine like pole stars: and now be strong and warm me,
for to you I will be your cherishing alumnus."

8. in the Vintry
At the Three Cranes] Here the tavern with the sign of the Three
Cranes is meant: the three cranes were originally three strong
cranes of timber, placed on the Vintry-wharf, for lifting from the
ships the vessels of foreign wine which were landed there.

9. Ergo:
Licet non enclitice,
Tamen enthymematice,
Notandum imprimis,
Ut ne quid nimis.
Tantum pro primo.] "Therefore: It must be noted in the first place
that nothing may be in excess. So much for the first (part)." (PH)

10. friskajolly] So in the Interlude of the iiii Elements, n.d.;

"Sing fryska Jolly with hey troly loly."
Sig. B ii

11. perihermenial principles] i.e. principles of interpretation.

12. Master Porphyry] Porphyry of Tyre AD c. 234 - c. 305, a
Neoplatonic philosopher who edited and published the Enneads, the
only collection of the work of his teacher Plotinus. He also wrote
many works himself on a wide variety of topics. His Isagoge, or
Introduction, is an introduction to logic and philosophy, and in
Latin translation it was the standard textbook on logic throughout
the Middle Ages. In addition, through several of his works, most
notably Philosophy from Oracles and Against the Christians, he was
involved in a controversy with a number of early Christians.
(Wikipedia)

13. pope-holy] Occurs again several times in our author's
writings. In Piers Plowman we find,

"And now so singular by himself, nor so pope holy."
Sig. T ed 1561.

In Chaucer's Romaunt of the Rose is the following description;

"Another thing was done there write, 
That seemed like an hypocrite,
And it was cleped pope holy,
That ilke is she that privily
Ne spared never a wicked deed
When men of her taken none heed,
And maketh her outward precious,
With pale visage and piteous,
And seemeth a simple creature," &c.
Works, fol. 111. ed. 1602,

The original French of the preceding passage is,

"Une autre imaige estoit escripte,
Qui sembloit bien estre ypocrite,
Papelardie est appellee," &c.
Le Rom. de la Rose, vol. i. 15. ed. 1735,

Roquefort (Gloss. de la Langue Romaine) cites these lines under
"Papelardie, papelardise: Hypocrisie, tromperie, subtilité,
mauvaise foi. ('Hypocrisy, deceit, subtlety, bad faith')" See too
Du Cange's Gloss. in vv. Papelardia, Papelardus. Compare also
Lydgate;

"And for popeholy and vice look well about."
The Prohemy of a marriage, &c., MS. Hart. 372. fol. 51.

and Barclay;

"Over sad or proud, deceitful and pope holy." 
The Ship of Fools, fol. 57. ed. 1570.

and the Interlude of the iiii Elements, n. d.

"For rather than I would use such folly
To pray, to study, or be pope holy,
I had as lief be dead."
Sig. B II.

14. content,] Qy. "convent" i.e. to call together?

15. popping daws] Compare our author's Why come ye not to Court;

"Popping foolish daws." 
v. 261.

and v. 121 of the present piece;

"And porishly forth popped
Your schismaticate saws."

"Popping, blabbing, like a popinjay or parrot." Gloss. to Exmoor
Scolding: daws, i.e. simpletons.

16. Sive per aequivocum,
Sive per univocum,
Sive sic, sive not so] "Either through the equivocal, Or through
the unequivocal, Or so or not so."

17. Te he, &c.] Expressions of laughter;

"Te he, quod she, and clapped the window to."
Chaucer's Miller's Tale, v. 3738. ed. Tyr.

18. Ye are unhappily ured.
In your dialectical, &c.] The old (and unique) copy is without
punctuation in this passage; but that the first line closes the
sense, and that Skelton did not mean that these heretics were
unhappily ured in their dialectical, &c. would appear from a
comparison of other passages:

"Against these heretics,
Now of late abjured,
Most unhappily ured:
For be ye well assured,"
v. 403 of the present piece.

"But men nowadays so unhappily be ured,
That nothing than wealth may worse be endured."
Magnificence, v. 6.

"O Scots perjured,
Unhappily ured,
Ye may be assured," &c.
The Doughty Duke of Albany, v. 125.

In our author's Colyn Cloute we find,

"Wherefore he hath good ure," &c.
v. 1003.

in the note on which line I have cited various examples of ure in
the sense of-hap, luck; and in his poem Against the Scots,

"Maleured was your false intent,"
v. 111.

which surely means-Ill-fortuned, &c. (Fr. malheur). Is unhappily
ured to be considered as nearly synonymous with maleured, or is it
to be explained,-unhappily (evilly) used, practised, habituated?

19. syllogisari
Non est ex particulari,
Neque negativis,
Recte concludere si vis,
Et caetera, id genus?] "If you want to conclude rightly in a case
like this, you cannot argue from a particular case, or from
negatives."

20. corde tenus] "In your heart."

21. verbo tenus] "In your name."

22. Your hearts then were hosed] i.e. Your hearts were in your
hose (breeches): so again our author in his Why come ye not to
Court;

"Their hearts be in their hose."
v. 286.

See too Ray's Proverbs, (Scottish), p. 292. ed. 1768.

23. Respondere ad quantum] "To give your opinion."

24. confuse tantum] "So much confounded."

25. Harpocrates] The Egyptian God of Silence.

26 De rebus apparentibus
Et non existentibus] "Concerning things apparent and non-
existent."

27. inter enigmata 
And inter paradigmata] "Amongst riddles and amongst paradigms."

28. With blowing out your horns,
Full of mockish scorns,
With chating and recheating]. Whatever Skelton may have meant by
"chating," (perhaps he uses it for chatting,-in the next line we
have "prating"),-recheating is properly a hunting term, and
signifies sounding the rechate or recheat (Fr.), a certain set of
notes blown with the horn to recall the dogs.

29. Logici] "Logicians."

30. Isagogici] "Beginners in theological studies"

31. the people of lay fee] i.e. the laity; as again in our
author's Colyn Cloute;

"The lay fee people rails."
v. 403.

fee, i.e. possessions; see Tyrwhitt's Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant.
Tales, Jamieson's Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang., and Todd's Johnson's
Dict. in v.

32. latria] "The worship due to God only."

33. But, I trow, yourself ye oversee
What longeth to Christ's humanity.
If ye have read de hyperdulia,
Then ye know what betokeneth dulia]-oversee i.e. overlook:
longeth, i.e. belongeth. "L'adoration de Superdulie est celle qui
se dare la Vierge, et elle est plus eminente pour la grace qu'elle
a recu de Dieu, plus particulière les autres Saints, pour avoir
porte le Fils de Dieu en ses entrailles." ("The worship of
Hyperdulia, is that which is given to the Vigin, and she is more
eminent than the other saints, for the particular grace she has
received from God for having carried the Son of God in her womb")
Perroniana, p. 71. "Aux Saints nous de ferons l'honneur qu'on
appelle Dulie." ("To the saints we give the honour called Dulia")
Id. p. 312. ed. 1740. "Dulia (d???e?a) enim adoratio est, quae
etiam creaturae exhibetur, quae duas species habet, unam qua
hominibus indifferenter, alteram quae soli humanitati Christi
exhibetur." ("For this dulia is the adoration, which is shown to
created things, there are two kinds: one for men generally, the
other part which is paid to the humanity of Christ alone")
Gaufridus Abbas in Epist. ad Albinum Cardinalem,-cited by Du
Cange, Gloss. in v.

34. Tantum pro Secundo] "So much for the second (part)".

35. Peroratio ad nuper abjuratos quosdam hypotheticos hereticos]
"The peroration against certain recently abjured hypothetical
heretics." (PH)

36. Audite, viri Ismaelitae, non dico Israelitae;
Audite, inquam, viri Madianitae, Ascalonitae ;
Ammonitae, Gabaonitae, audite verba que loquar.] "Hear, men of
Ishmael, I do not say Israel; hear, say I, men of Madian, of
Askalon, of Ammon, of Gabaon, hear the words I shall speak." (PH)

37. Opus evangelii &c.] "The Book of the Gospel is the food of the
elect; but, because you are not of the race of the good, you who
caterize (make improper use of) the categories of evil spirits,
therefore also the rest of your problems, schemata, dilemmas, may
they be anathema. It is an inescapable argument."

38. his epistle ad Paulinum] i.e. his (St. Jerome's) Epistle ad
Paulinum presbyterum de omnibus divine historiae libris, ("To Paul
the priest about all the books of divine history") prefixed to the
Vulgate: the passage quoted by Skelton is also to be found in
Hieronymi Opera, I. 1011. ed. 1609.

39. David, inquit, Simonides noster, Pindarus, et Alcaeus, Flaccus
quoque, Catullus, atque Serenus, Christum lyra personat, et in
decachordo psalterio ab inferis excitat resurgentem. Haec Hier] "
David, who is our Simonides, Pindar, and Alcæus, our Horace, our
Catullus, and our Serenus all in one, sings of Christ to his lyre;
and on a psaltery with ten strings calls him from the lower world
to rise again " (W.H. Freemantle).

40. Serenus] The Scholium on this name in Hieronymi Opera is;
"Aulus Serenus lyricus ipse etiam fuit, et, ut Terentianus est
auctor, eleganti ac facili ingenio, et ad jocos amoresque
describendos accommodate: Martianus Capella ac Nonius saepius ejus
carmina citant." ("Aulus Serenus himself wrote poems, and as were
those of Terentius, they were in an elegant and smooth style,
appropriate for amusing tales of love"), I. 1017. ed. 1609.-See
also an account of Serenus, prefixed to his extant pieces, in
Wernsdorf's Poetae Latini Minores, tom. ii.

41. For if ye sadly look,
And wisely read the Book
Of Good Advertisement,
With, me ye must consent, &c.] sadly look, i.e. seriously look,
consider. In the Garland of Laurel Skelton mentions, as one of his
own compositions,

Item Good Advisement, that brainless doth blame.
v. 1186.

Qy. does he allude to it here ?

42. Dixi iniquis, Nolite inique agere; et delinquentibus, Nolite
exaltare cornu.] "I said to the wicked, be not stubborn; and to
evil-doers, lift not up the horn. (PH)"

43. Tantum pro tertio] "So much for the third (part)."

44. De raritate poetarum, deque gymnosophistarum, philosophorum,
theologorum, caeterorumque, eruditorum infinita numerositate,
Skel. L. epitoma.] "About the rarity of poets, and the infinite
abundance of gymnosophists, philosophers, theologians, and the
rest of the learned, this is Skelton Laureate's epitome." (PH)

45. Sunt infiniti &c.] "Infinite, innumerable are the sophists,
infinite, innumerable are the logicians, innumerable are the
philosophers and the theologians, infinite in number are doctors,
and masters; but poets are few and rare. Hence all that is
precious is rare. I think, then, that poets before all others are
filled with the divine afflatus. So Plato thinks and so Socrates;
so the great Macedonian, so Caesar, the greatest of Roman heroes,
always honoured the renowned poets." (PH)



MAGNIFICENCE.

[From the ed. printed by Rastell, n.d.;-in which the list of
characters is placed at the end of the drama]
<1>
A GOODLY INTERLUDE AND A MERRY,
DEVISED AND MADE BY MASTER SKELTON, POET LAUREATE.

These be the Names of the Players:

Felicity.
Liberty.
Measure.
Magnificence.
Fancy.
Counterfeit Count[enance].
Crafty Conveyance.
Cloaked Collusion.
Courtly Abusion.
Folly.
Adversity.
Poverty.
Despair.
Mischief.
Goodhope.
Redress.
[Sad] Circumspection.
Perseverance.

Felicity. All things contrived by man's reason,
The world environed of high and low estate.
Be it early or late, wealth hath a season.
Wealth is of wisdom the very true probate;<2>
A fool is he with wealth that falleth at debate:
But men nowadays so unhappily be ured,
That nothing than wealth may worse be endured.
To tell you the cause me seemeth it no need,
The amends thereof is far to call again;<3>
For, when men buy wealth, they have little dread               10
Of that may come after; experience true and plain,
How after a drought there falleth a shower of rain,
And after a heat oft cometh a stormy cold.
A man may have wealth, but not, as he wold,
Aye to continue and still to endure;
But if prudence be proved with sad circumspection,
Wealth might be won and made to the lure,<4>
If nobleness were acquainted with sober direction;
But will hath reason so under subjection,
And so disordereth this world over all,                        20
That wealth and felicity is passing small.
But where wonnes wealth, an a man would weet?	[Enter LIBERTY]
For Wealthful Felicity truly is my name.

Liberty. Mary,<5> Wealth and I was appointed to meet,
And either I am deceived, or ye be the same.

Fel. Sir, as ye say, I have heard of your fame;
Your name is Liberty, as I understand.

Lib. True you say, sir; give me your hand.

Fel. And from whence come ye, an it might be asked?

Lib. To tell you, sir, I dare not, lest I should be masked     30
In a pair of fetters or a pair of stocks.

Fel. Hear you not how this gentleman mocks?

Lib. Yea, to knacking earnest what an it preve?<6>

Fel. Why, to say what he will, Liberty hath leave.

Lib. Yet Liberty hath been locked up and kept in the mew.<7>

Fel. Indeed, sir, that liberty was not worth a cue!<8>
Howbeit Liberty may sometime be too large,
But if reason be regent and ruler of your barge.

Lib. To that ye say I can well condescend<9>:
Show forth, I pray you, herein what you intend.

Fel. Of that I intend to make demonstration,
It asketh leisure with good advertisement.                     40
First, I say, we ought to have in consideration,
That Liberty be linked with the chain of continence,
Liberty to let from all manner offence;
For Liberty at large is loth to be stopped,
But with continence your courage must be cropped.

Lib. Then thus to you-

Fel. Nay, suffer me yet further to say,
And peradventure I shall content your mind.                    50
Liberty, I wot well, forbear no man there may:
It is so sweet in all manner of kind;
Howbeit, Liberty maketh many a man blind;
By Liberty is done many a great excess;
Liberty at large will oft wax reckless:
Perceive ye this parcel?

Lib. Yea, sir, passing well:
But an you would me permit
To show part of my wit,
Somewhat I could infer                                         60
Your conceit to debar,<9>
Under supportation
Of patient toleration

Fel. God forbid ye should be let
Your reasons forth to fet;
Wherefore at liberty.
Say what ye will to me.

Lib. Briefly to touch of my purpose the effect;
Liberty is laudable and privileged from law,
Judicial rigour shall not me correct-                          70

Fel. Soft, my friend; herein your reason is but raw.

Lib. Yet suffer me to say the surplus of my saw<10>;
What wot ye whereupon I will conclude?
I say there is no wealth whereas Liberty is subdued;
I trow ye cannot say nay much to this;
To live under law it is captivity;
Where dread leadeth the dance, there is no joy nor bliss;
Or how can ye prove that there is felicity,
An you have not your own free liberty
To sport at your pleasure, to run, and to ride?                80
Where Liberty is absent, set wealth aside.

Hic Intrat MEASURE
("Enter MEASURE")

Meas. Christ you assist in your altercation!

Fel. Why, have you heard of our disputation?

Meas. I perceive well how each of you doth reason.

Lib. Master Measure, you be come in good season.

Meas. And it is wonder<11> that your wild insolence
Can be content with Measure's presence!

Fel. Would it please you then-

Lib. Us to inform and ken-

Meas. Ah, ye be wondrous men!                                  90
Your language is like the pen
Of him that writeth too fast.

Fel. Sir, if any word have passed
Me, either first or last,
To you I arret<12> it, and cast
Thereof the reformation.

Lib. And I of the same fashion;
Howbeit, by protestation,
Displeasure that you none take,
Some reason we must make.                                     100

Meas. That will not I forsake,
So it in measure be:
Come off, therefore, let see<13>:
Shall I begin, or ye?

Fel. Nay, ye shall begin, by my will.

Lib. It is reason and skill<14>,
We your pleasure fulfil.

Meas. Then ye must both consent
You to hold content
With my argument;                                             110
And I must you require
Me patiently to hear.

Fel. Yes, sir, with right good cheer.

Lib. With all my heart entire.

Meas. Horatius to record,<15> in his volumes old,
With every condition measure must be sought:
Wealth without measure would bear himself too bold,
Liberty without measure prove a thing of nought;
I ponder by number; by measure all thing is wrought,
As at the first original, by godly opinion,                   120
Which proveth well that measure should have dominion:
Where measure is master, plenty doth none offence;
Where measure lacketh, all thing disordered is;
Where measure is absent, riot keepeth residence;
Where measure is ruler, there is nothing amiss;
Measure is treasure:<16> How say ye, is it not this?

Fel. Yes, questionless, in mine opinion,
Measure is worthy to have dominion.

Lib. Unto that same I am right well agreed,
So that Liberty be not left behind.                           130

Meas. Yea, Liberty with Measure need never dread.

Lib. What, Liberty to Measure then would ye bind?

Meas. What else? for otherwise it were against kind:
Liberty should leap and run where he list
It were no virtue, it were a thing unblessed;
It were a mischief, if Liberty lacked a rein,
Wherewith to rule him with the writhing of a wrest:
All trebles and tenors be ruled by a mean;<17>
Liberty without Measure is accounted for a beast;
There is no surfeit where Measure ruleth the feast;
there is no excess where Measure hath his health;
Measure continueth prosperity and wealth.                     140

Fel. Unto your rule I will annex my mind.

Lib. So would I, but I would be loth,
That wont was to be foremost, now to come behind:
It were a shame, to God I make an oath,
Without I might cut it out of the broad cloth,
As I was wont ever at my free will.

Meas. But have ye not heard say, that will is no skill?
Take sad direction, and leave this wantonness.                150

Lib. It is no mastery<18>.

Fel. Tush, let Measure proceed,
And after his mind hardly yourself address;
For, without Measure, Poverty and Need
Will creep upon us, and us to Mischief lead:
For Mischief will master us if Measure us forsake.

Lib. Well, I am content your ways to take.

Meas. Surely I am joyous that ye be minded thus.
Magnificence to maintain, your promotion shall be.

Fel. So in his heart he may be glad of us.                    160

Lib. There is no prince but he hath need of us three:
Wealth with Measure, and pleasant Liberty.

Meas. Now pleaseth you a little while to stand;
Meseemeth Magnificence is coming here at hand.

Hic Intrat MAGNIFICENCE
("Enter MAGNIFICENCE")

Magn. To assure you of my noble port and fame,
Who list to know, Magnificence I hight.
But Measure, my friend, what hight this man's name?

Meas. Sir, though ye be a noble prince of might,
Yet in this man you must set your delight.
And, sir, this other man's name is Liberty.                   170

Magn. Welcome, friends, ye are both unto me.
But now let me know of your conversation.

Fel. Pleaseth your Grace, Felicity they me call.

Lib. And I am Liberty, made of in every nation.

Magn. Convenient persons for any prince royal.
Wealth with Liberty, with me both dwell ye shall,
To the guiding of my Measure you both committing:
That Measure be master, us seemeth it is sitting.<19>

Meas. Whereas ye have, sir, to me them assigned,
Such order I trust with them for to take,                     180
That Wealth with Measure shall be combined,
And Liberty his large with Measure shall make.

Fel. Your ordinance, sir, I will not forsake.

Lib. And I myself wholly to you will incline.

Magn. Then may I say that ye be servants mine,
For by Measure, I warn you, we think to be guided.
Wherein it is necessary my pleasure you know,
Measure and I will never be divided
For no discord that any man can sow;
For Measure is a mean, neither too high nor too low,          190
In whose attemperance I have such delight,
That Measure shall never depart from my sight.

Fel. Laudable your conceit is to be accounted;
For Wealth without Measure suddenly will slide.

Lib. As your Grace full nobly hath recounted,
Measure with nobleness should be allied.

Magn. Then, Liberty, see that Measure be your guide,
For I will use you by this advertisement.

Fel. Then shall you have with you prosperity resident.

Meas. I trow Good Fortune hath annexed us together,           200
To see how greeable we are of one mind;
There is no flatterer, nor losel so lither,
This linked chain of love that can unbind.
Now that ye have me chief ruler assigned,
I will endeavour me to order every thing
Your nobleness and honour concerning.

Lib. In joy and mirth your mind shall be enlarged,
And not embraced with pusillanimity;
But plenarly all thought from you must be discharged,
If ye list to live after your free Liberty:                   210
All delectations acquainted is with me.
By me all persons work what they list.

Meas. Hem, sir, yet beware of "Had I wist!"<20>
Liberty in some cause becometh a gentle mind,
By cause course of Measure, if I be in the way:
Who counteth without me is cast too far behind
Of his reckoning, as evidently we may
See at our eye the world day by day:
For default of Measure all thing doth exceed.

Fel. All that ye say is as true as the Creed.                 220
For howbeit, Liberty to Wealth is convenient,
And from Felicity may not be forborne,
Yet Measure hath been so long from us absent,
That all men laugh at Liberty to scorn;
Wealth and wit, I say, be so threadbare worn,
That all is without Measure, and far beyond the moon.

Magn. Then nobleness, I see well, is almost undone,
But if thereof the sooner amends be made;
For doubtless I perceive my magnificence
Without Measure lightly may fade,                             230
Of too much liberty under the offence:
Wherefore, Measure, take Liberty with you hence,
And rule him after the rule of your school.

Lib. What, sir, would ye make me a popping fool?<21>

Meas. Why, were not yourself agreed to the same,
And now would ye swerve from your own ordinance?

Lib. I would be ruled, an I might for shame.

Fel. Ah, ye make me laugh at your inconstancy.

Magn. Sir, without any longer dalliance,
Take Liberty to rule, and follow mine intent.                 240

Meas. It shall be done at your commandement.

Itaque MEASURE exeat locum cum LIBERTATE et maneat MAGNIFICENCE
cum FELICITATE
("Here MEASURE leaves with LIBERTY and MAGNIFICENCE remains with
FELICITY")

Magn. It is a wanton thing, this Liberty;
Perceive you not how loth he was to abide
The rule of Measure, notwithstanding we
Have deputed Measure him to guide?
By measure each thing duly is tried:
Think you not thus, my friend Felicity?

Fel. God forbid that it otherwise should be!

Magn. Ye could not else, I wot, with me endure.

Fel. Endure? No, God wot, it were great pain!                 250
But if I were ordered by just measure
It were not possible me long to retain.

Hic Intrat FANCY
("Enter FANCY")

Fan. Tush, hold your peace, your language is vain.
Please it your Grace to take no disdain,
To show you plainly the truth as I think.

Magn. Here is none forceth whether you float or sink!<22>

Fel. From whence come you, sir, that no man looked after?

Magn. Or who made you so bold to interrupt my tale?

Fan. Now, benedicite,<23> ye ween I were some hafter,
Or else some jangling Jack of the Vale;                       260
Ye ween that I am drunken, because I look pale.

Magn. Meseemeth that ye have drunken more than ye have bled.

Fan. Yet among noblemen I was brought up and bred.

Fel. Now leave this jangling, and to us expound
Why that ye said our language was in vain.

Fan. Mary, upon truth my reason I ground,
That without Largesse nobleness cannot reign;
And that I said once, yet I say again.
That without Largesse worship hath no place,
For Largesse is a purchaser of pardon and of grace.           270

Magn. Now, I beseech thee, tell me what is thy name?

Fan. Largesse, that all lords should love, sir, I hight.

Fel. But hight you Largesse, increase of noble fame?

Fan. Yea, sir, undoubted.

Fel. Then of very right
With Magnificence, this noble prince of might,
Should be your dwelling, in my consideration.

Magn. Yet we will therein take good deliberation.

Fan. As in that, I will not be against your pleasure.

Fel. Sir, hardely remember what may your name advance.        280

Magn. Largesse is laudable, so it be in measure.

Fan. Largesse is he that all princes doth advance;
I report me herein to King Lewis of France.<24>

Fel. Why have ye him named and all other refused?

Fan. For, sith he died, Largesse was little used.
Pluck up your mind, sir; what ail you to muse?
Have ye not Wealth here at your will?
It is but a madding, these ways that ye use:
What availeth Lordship, yourself for to kill
With care and with thought how Jack shall have Jill?<25>      290

Magn. What? I have espied ye are a careless page.

Fan. By God, sir, ye see but few wise men of mine age;
But Covetise hath blown you so full of wind
That colica passio<A painful abdominal spasm> hath groped you by
the guts.

Fel. In faith, Brother Largesse, you have a merry mind.
Fan. In faith, I set not by the world two Doncaster cuts.<26>

Magn. Ye want but a wild flying bolt to shoot at the butts:
Though Largesse ye hight, your language is too large;
For which end goeth forward ye take little charge.

Fel. Let see, this check if ye void can.                      300

Fan. In faith, else had I gone too long to school,
But if I could know a goose from a swan!

Magn. Well, wise men may eat the fish, when ye shall draw the
pool.

Fan. In faith, I will not say that ye shall prove a fool,
But oft time have I seen wise men do mad deeds.

Magn. Go! shake the dog! hey,<27> sith ye will needs!
You are nothing meet with us for to dwell,
That with your lord and master so pertly can prate:
Get you hence, I say, but my counsel;
I will not use you to play with me checkmate.                 310

Fan. Sir, if I have offended your noble estate,<28>
I trow I have brought you such writing of record
That I shall have you again my good lord,
To you recommendeth Sad Circumspection.
And sendeth you this writing closed under seal.

Magn. This writing is welcome with hearty affection:
Why kept you it thus long? How doth he? Well?

Fan. Sir, thanked be God, he hath his heal.

Magn. Wealth, get you home, and command me to Measure;
Bid him take good heed to you, my singular treasure.          320

Fel. Is there anything else your Grace will command me?

Magn. Nothing but fare you well till soon;
And that he take good keep to Liberty.

Fel. Your pleasure, sir, shortly shall be done.

Magn. I shall come to you myself, I trow, this afternoon	[Here
Felicity goes out]
I pray you, Largesse, here to remain,
Whilst I know what this letter doth contain.

Hic faciat tanquam legeret litteras tacite. Interim superveniat
cantando COUNTERFEIT COUNTENANCE suspenso grade, qui, viso
MAGNIFICENCE, sensim retrocedat; at tempus post pusillum rursum
accedat COUNTERFEIT COUNTENANCE prospectando et vocitando a longe;
et FANCY animet silentium cum manu.
("As MAGNIFICENCE is reading the letter, COUNTERFEIT COUNTENANCE
comes in on tiptoe, humming to himself, but, seeing MAGNIFICENCE,
withdraws quietly; then, a little later, He comes back again,
hailing FANCY from a safe distance. FANCY motions him to keep
quiet."(PH)

C. Count. What! Fancy, Fancy!

Magn. Who is that that thus did cry?
Methought he called Fancy.                                    330

Fan. It was a Fleming hight Hansy.

Magn. Methought he called Fancy me behind.

Fan. Nay, sir, it was nothing but your mind:
But now, sir, as touching this letter-

Magn. I shall look in it at leisure better:
And surely ye are to him behold;
And for his sake right gladly I wold
Do what I could to do you good.

Fan. I pray God keep you in that mood!

Magn. This letter was written far hence.                      340

Fan. By lakin, sir, it hath cost me pence
And groats many one, ere I came to your presence.

Magn. Where was it delivered you, show unto me.

Fan. By God, sir, beyond the sea.

Magn. At what place now, as you guess?

Fan. By my troth, sir, at Pountesse;<29>
This writing was taken me there,
But never was I in greater fear.

Magn. How so?

Fan. By God, at the sea side,                                 350
Had I not opened my purse wide
I trow, by Our Lady, I had been slain,
Or else I had lost mine ears twain.

Magn. By your sooth?<30>

Fan. Yea, and there is such a watch,
That no man can scape but they him catch.
They bare me in hand that I was a spy;<31>
And another bade put out mine eye,
Another would mine eye were bleared,
Another bade shave half my beard;                             360
And boys to the pillory gan me pluck,
And would have made me Friar Tuck,
To preach out of the pillory hole<32>
Without an antetheme<33> or a stole; 
And some bade "Sear him with a mark:"
To get me fro them I had much work.

Magn. Mary, sir, ye were afraid.

Fan. By my troth, had I not paid and prayed,
And made largesse, as I hight,<34>
I had not been here with you this night;                      370
But surely largesse saved my life,
For largesse stinteth all manner of strife.

Magn. It doth so, sure, now and then,
But largesse is not meet for every man.

Fan. No, but for you great estates:<35>
Largesse stinteth great debates;
And he that I came fro to this place
Said I was meet for your Grace;
And indeed, sir, I hear men talk,
By the way, as I ride and walk,                               380
Say how you exceed in nobleness,
If you had with you Largesse.

Magn. And say they so in very deed?

Fan. With yea, sir, so God me speed.

Magn. Yet Measure is a merry mean.<36>

Fan. Yea, sir, a blanched almond is no bean.
Measure is meet for a merchant's hall,
But Largesse becometh a state royal.
What, should you pinch at a peck of oats,
Ye would soon pinch at a peck of groats.                      390
Thus is the talking of one and of other,
As men dare speak it hugger-mugger;
A lord, a niggard, it is a shame,
But Largesse may amend your name.

Magn. In faith, Largesse, welcome to me.

Fan. I pray you, sir, I may so be,
And of my service you shall not miss.

Magn. Together we will talk more of this:
Let us depart from hence home to my place.

Fan. I follow even after your noble Grace.                    400

Hic descedat MAGNIFICENCE cum FANCY, et intrat COUNTERFEIT
COUNTENANCE  
("Exit MAGNIFICENCE with FANCY and enter COUNTERFEIT
COUNTENANCE."(PH)<37>

C. Count. What, I say, hark a word.

Fan. Do away, I say, the devil's turd!

C. Count. Yea, but how long shall I here await?

Fan. By God's body, I come straight:
I hate this blundering <38> that thou dost make.	[Exit FANCY]

C. Count. Now, to the devil I thee betake,
For in faith ye be well met!
Fancy hath catched in a fly-net
This noble man Magnificence,
Of Largesse under the pretence.                               410
They have made me here to putt the stone:<39>
But now will I, that they be gone,
In bastard rhyme, after the doggerel guise,
Tell you whereof my name doth rise.
For Counterfeit Countenance known am I;
This world is full of my folly.
I set not by him a fly,
That cannot counterfeit a lie,
Swear, and stare, and bide thereby,
And countenance it cleanly,                                   420
And defend it mannerly.
A knave will counterfeit now a knight,
A lurdan like a lord to fight,<40>
A minstrel like a man of might,
A tapster like a lady bright:
Thus make I them with thrift to fight,
Thus at the last I bring him right
To Tyburn, where they hang on height.
To counterfeit I can by pretty ways:
Of nights to occupy counterfeit keys,                         430
Cleanly to counterfeit new arrays,
Counterfeit earnest by way of plays:
Thus am I occupied at all assays;<41>
Whatsoever I do, all men me praise,
And mickle am I made of nowadays:
Counterfeit matters in the law of the land,
With gold and groats they grease my hand,
Instead of right that wrong may stand,
And counterfeit freedom that is bound;
I counterfeit sugar that is but found;<42>                    440
Counterfeit captains by me are manned;
Of all lewdness I kindle the brand;
Counterfeit kindness, and think deceit;
Counterfeit letters by the way of sleight;
Subtly using counterfeit weight;
Counterfeit language, fayty bon geyte.<43>
Counterfeit is a proper bait;
A count to counterfeit in a receipt;
To counterfeit well is a good conceit.
Counterfeit maidenhood may well be borne,                     450
But counterfeit coins is laughing to scorn;
It is evil patching of that is torn;
When the nap is rough, it would be shorn;
Counterfeit halting without a thorn;
Yet counterfeit chaffer is but evil corn;
All thing is worse when it is worn.
What would ye, wives, counterfeit
The courtly guise of the new jet?<44>
An old barn would be underset:
It is much worth that is far-fet.                             460
What, wanton, wanton, now well y-met!
What, Margery Milk Duck,<45> marmoset!
It would be masked in my net;
It would be nice, though I say nay;
By Creed, it would have fresh array,
And therefore shall my husband pay;
To counterfeit she will essay
All the new guise, fresh and gay,
And be as pretty as she may,
And jet it jolly as a jay:                                    470
Counterfeit preaching, and believe the contrary;
Counterfeit conscience, peevish pope-holy;
Counterfeit sadness, with dealing full madly;
Counterfeit holiness is called hypocrisy;
Counterfeit reason is not worth a fly;
Counterfeit wisdom, and works of folly;
Counterfeit countenance every man doth occupy
Counterfeit worship outward men may see;
Riches rideth out, at home is poverty;
Counterfeit pleasure is borne out by me:                      480
Coll would go cleanly, an it will not be,
And Annot would be nice, and laughs Tehe wehe!
Your counterfeit countenance is all of nicety,
A plumed partridge all ready to fly:
A knuckleboneyard<46> will counterfeit a clerk,
He would trot gently, but he is too stark,
At his cloaked counterfeiting dogs doth bark;
A carter a courtier, it is a worthy wark,
That with his whip his mares was wont to yark;
A custrel to drive the devil out of the dark,                 490
A counterfeit courtier with a knave's mark.
To counterfeit thus friars have learned me;
Thus nuns now and then, an it might be,
Would take in the way of counterfeit charity
The grace of God under benedicite;<23>
To counterfeit their counsel they give me a fee;
Canons cannot counterfeit but upon three,
Monks may not for dread that men should them see.

Hic ingrediatur FANCY, properantur cum CRAFTY CONVEYANCE cum
famine multo adinvicem garrulantes: tandem, viso COUNTERFEIT
COUNTENANCE, dicat CRAFTY CONVEYANCE
("Here FANCY comes in quickly with CRAFTY CONVEYANCE, the two
talking rapidly and at length to one another. At last, seeing
COUNTERFEIT COUNTENANCE, CRAFTY CONVEYANCE says-" (PH)

Cr. Con. What, Counterfeit Countenance!

C. Count. What, Crafty Conveyance!                            500

Fan. What, the devil, are ye two of acquaintance?
God give you a very mischance!

Cr. Con. Yes, yes, sir, he and I have met.

C. Count. We have been together both early and late:
But, Fancy, my friend, where have ye been so long?

Fan. By God, I have been about a pretty prong;
Crafty Conveyance, I should say, and I.

Cr. Con. By God, we have made Magnificence to eat a fly.

C. Count. How could ye do that, an I was away?

Fan. By God, man, both his pageant and thine he can play.     510

C. Count. Say truth?

Cr. Con. Yes, yes, by lakin, I shall thee warrant,
As long as I live, thou hast an heir apparent.

Fan. Yet have we picked out a room for thee.

C. Count. Why, shall we dwell together all three?

Cr. Con. Why, man, it were too great a wonder
That we three gallants should be long asunder.

C. Count. For Cock's heart, give me thy hand.

Fan. By the mass, for ye are able to destroy an whole land.

Cr. Con. By God, yet it must begin much of thee.              520

Fan. Who that is ruled by us it shall be long ere he thé.

C. Count. But, I say, keepest thou the old name still that thou
had?

Cr. Con. Why, weenest thou, whoreson, that I were so mad?

Fan. Nay, nay, he hath changed his, and I have changed mine.

Count. Now, what is his name, and what is thine?

Fan. In faith, Largesse I hight,
And I am made a knight.

C. Count. A rebellion against nature,
So large a man, and so little of stature!
But, sir, how counterfeited ye?                               530

Cr. Con. Sure Surveyance I named me. <47>

C. Count. Surveyance! where ye survey,
Thrift hath lost her coffer-key!

Fan. But is it not well? how thinkest thou?

C. Count. Yes, sir, I give God avow,
Myself could not counterfeit it better.
But what became of the letter,
That I counterfeited you underneath a shroud?

Fan. By the mass, oddly well allowed.

Cr. Con. By God, had not I it conveyed                        540
Fancy had been deceived.

C. Count. I wot, thou art false enough for one.

Fan. By my troth, we had been gone:
And yet, in faith, man, we lacked thee
For to speak with Liberty.

C. Count. What is Largesse without Liberty?

Cr. Con. By Measure mastered yet is he.

C. Count. What, is your conveyance no better?

Fan. In faith, Measure is like a tetter,
That overgroweth a man's face,                                550
So he ruleth over all our place.

Cr. Con. Now therefore, whilst we are together,-
Counterfeit Countenance, nay, come hither,-
I say, whilst we are together in same-

C. Count. Tush, a straw, it is a shame
That we can no better than so.

Fan. We will remedy it, man, ere we go:
For, like as mustard is sharp of taste,<48>
Right so a sharp fancy must be found
Wherewith Measure to confound.                                560

Cr. Con. Can you a remedy for a phthisic,
That showeth yourself thus sped in physic?

C. Count. It is a gentle reason of a rake.

Fan. For all these japes yet that ye make-

Cr. Con. Your fancy maketh mine elbow to ache.

Fan. Let see, find you a better way.

C. Count. Take no displeasure of what we say.

Cr. Con. Nay, an you be angry and overthwart,
A man may beshrew your angry heart.

Fan. Tush, a straw, I thought none ill.                       570

C Count. What, shall we jangle thus all the day still?

Cr. Con. Nay, let us our heads together cast.

Fan. Yea, and see how it may be compassed,
That Measure were cast out of the doors.

C. Count. Alas, where is my boots and my spurs?

Cr. Con. In all this haste whither will ye ride?

C. Count. I trow, it shall not need to abide.
Cock's wounds, see, sirs, see, see!

Hic ingrediatur CLOAKED COLLUSION cum elato aspectu, deorsum et
sursum ambulando.
("Enter CLOAKED COLLUSION, walking up and down with a lofty
air"(PH)

Fan. Cock's arms, what is he?

Cr. Con. By Cock's heart, he looketh high;                    580
He hawketh, methink, for a butterfly.

C. Count. Now, by Cock's heart, well abidden,
For, had you not come, I had ridden.

Cl. Col. Thy words be but wind, never they have no weight;
Thou hast made me play the iurde hayt.<49>

C. Count. And if ye knew how I have mused
I am sure ye would have me excused.

Cl. Col. I say, come hither: what are these twain?

C. Count. By God, sir, this is Fancy small brain;
And Crafty Conveyance, know you not him?                      590

Cl. Col. Know him, sir! quod he: yes, by Saint Sim.
Here is a leash of ratches to run a hare:<50>
Woe is that purse that ye shall share!

Fan. What call ye him, this?

Cr. Con. I trow what he is.

C. Count. Tush, hold your peace.
See you not how they press
For to know your name?

Cl. Col. Know they not me, they are to blame.
Know you not me, sirs?                                        600

Fan. No, indeed.

Cr. Con. Abide, let me see, take better heed;
Cock's heart, it is Cloaked Collusion.

Cl. Col. Ay, sir, I pray God give you confusion!

Fan. Cock's arms, is that your name?

C. Count. Yea, by the mass, this is even the same,
That all this matter must undergrope.

Cr. Con. What is this he weareth-a cope?

Cl. Col. Cap, sir! I say you be too bold.

Fan. See how he is wrapped for the cold:                      610
Is it not a vestment?

Cl. Col. Ah, ye want a rope!

C. Count. Tush, it is Sir John Double-Cloak.

Fan. Sir, an if you would not be wroth-

Cl. Col. What sayest?

Fan. Here was too little cloth.

Cl. Col. Ah, Fancy, Fancy, God send thee brain!

Fan. Yea, for your wit is cloaked for the rain.

Cr. Con. Nay, let us not chatter thus still.

Cl. Col. Tell me, sirs, what is your will.                    620

C. Count. Sir, it is so that these twain
With Magnificence in household do remain,
And there they would have me to dwell,
But I will be ruled after your counsel.

Fan. Mary, so will we also.

Cl. Col. But tell me whereabout ye go.

C. Count. By God, we would get us all thither
Spell the remnant, and do together.

Cl. Col. Hath Magnificence any treasure?

Cr. Con. Yea, but he spendeth it all in measure.              630

Cl. Col. Why, dwelleth Measure where ye two dwell?
In faith, he were better to dwell in hell.

Fan. Yet where we won, now there wonneth he.

Cl. Col. And have you not among you Liberty?

C. Count. Yea, but he is a captivity.<51>

Cl. Col. What the devil! how may that be?

C. Count. I cannot tell you: why ask you me?
Ask these two that there doth dwell.

Cl. Col. Sir, the plainness you tell me.<52>

Cr. Con. There dwelleth a master man called Measure-          640

Fan. Yea, and he hath rule of all his treasure.

Cr. Con. Nay, either let me tell, or else tell ye.

Fan. I care not I, tell on for me.

C. Count. I pray God let you never to thé!

Cl. Col. What the devil aileth you? can you not agree?

Cr. Con. I will pass over the circumstance,
And shortly show you the whole substance.
Fancy and I, we twain,
With Magnificence in household do remain,
And counterfeited our names we have                           650
Craftily all things upright to save,
His name Largesse, Surveyance mine:
Magnificence to us beginneth to incline
Counterfeit Countenance to have also,
And would that we should for him go.

C. Count. But shall I have mine old name still?

Cr. Con. Peace, I have not yet said what I will.

Fan. Here is a pistle of a postic!

Cl. Col. Tush, fonnish Fancy, thou art frantic.
Tell on, sir, how then?                                       660

Cr. Con. Mary, sir, he told us, when
We had him found we should him bring,
And that we failed not for nothing.

Cl. Col. All this ye may easily bring about.

Fan. Mary, the better an Measure were out.

Cl. Col. Why, can ye not put out that foul freke?

Cr. Con. No, in every corner he will peek,
So that we have no liberty,
Nor no man in court but he,
For Liberty he hath in guiding.                               670

C. Count. In faith, and without Liberty there is no biding.

Fan. In faith, and Liberty's room is there but small.

Cl. Col. Hem! that like I nothing at all.

Cr. Con. But, Counterfeit Countenance, go we together,
All three, I say.

C. Count. Shall I go? whither?

Cr. Con. To Magnificence with us twain,
And in his service thee to retain.

C. Count. But then, sir, what shall I hight?

Cr. Con. Ye and I talked thereof to-night.                    680

Fan. Yea, my fancy was out of owl-flight,
For it is out of my mind quite.

Cr. Con. And now it cometh to my remembrance:
Sir, ye shall hight Good Demeanance.

C. Count. By the arms of Calais, well conceived!<53>

Cr. Con. When we have him thither conveyed,
What an I frame such a sleight,
That Fancy with his fond conceit
Put Magnificence in such a madness,
That he shall have you in the stead of sadness,               690
And Sober Sadness shall be your name?

Cl. Col. By Cock's body, here beginneth the game!
For then shall we so craftily carry,.

Fan. For Cock's heart, tarry whilst that I come again.

Cr. Con. We will see you shortly one of us twain.

C. Count. Now let us go, an we shall, then.

Cl. Col. Now let see quit you like pretty men.

[Here FANCY, CRAFTY CONVEYANCE, and
COUNTERFEIT COUNTENANCE go out]

Hic Deambulat
("Here he walks up and down")

Cl. Col. To pass the time and order while a man may talk
Of one thing and other to occupy the place;                   700
Then for the season that I here shall walk,
As good to be occupied as up and down to trace
And do nothing; Howbeit, full little grace
There cometh and groweth of my coming,
For Cloaked Collusion is a perilous thing.
Double dealing and I be all one,
Crafting and hafting contrived is by me;
I can dissemble, I can both laugh and groan;
Plain dealing and I can never agree;
But division, dissension, derision, these three               710
And I am counterfeit of one mind and thought,
By the means of mischief to bring all things to nought.
And though I be so odious a guest,
And every man gladly my company would refuse,
In faith yet am I occupied with the best;
Full few that can themselves of me excuse.
When other men laugh, then study I and muse,
Devising the means and ways that I can,
How I may hurt and hinder every man:
Two faces in a hood covertly I bear,                          720
Water in the one hand, and fire in the other;
I can feed forth a fool, and lead him by the ear:
Falsehood in fellowship is my sworn brother.
By Cloaked Collusion, I say, and none other,
Cumbrance and trouble in England first began;
From that lord to that lord I rode and I ran,
And flattered them with fables fair before their face,
And told all the mischief I could behind their back,
And made as I had known nothing of the case;
I would begin all mischief, but I would bear no lack.         730
Thus can I learn you, sirs, to bear the devil's sack;
And yet, I trow, some of you be better sped than I
Friendship to feign, and think full litherly.
Paint to a purpose good countenance I can,
And craftily can I grope how every man is minded; 
My purpose is to spy and to point every man;
My tongue is with favel forked and tined:
By Cloaked Collusion thus many one is beguiled.
Each man to hinder I gape and I gasp;
My speech is all pleasure, but I sting like a wasp:           740
I am never glad but when I may do ill,
And never am I sorry but when that I see
I cannot mine appetite accomplish and fulfil
In hindrance of wealth and prosperity;
I laugh at all shrewdness, and lie at liberty.
I muster, I meddle; among these great estates
I sow seditious seeds of discord and debates:
To flatter and to fleer is all my pretence
Among all such persons as I well understand
Be light of belief and hasty of credence;                     750
I make them to startle and sparkle like a brand,
I move them, I maze them, I make them so fond,
That they will hear no man but the first tale:
And so by these means I brew much bale.

Hic ingrediatur COURTLY ABUSION cantando.
("Enter COURTLY ABUSION, singing.")

Court. Ab. Huffa, huffa, tanderum, tanderum, tain, huffa,
huffa!<54>

Cl. Col. This was properly prated, sirs! what said a?

Court. Ab. Rutty bully,<55> jolly rutterkin, heyda!<56>

Cl. Col. De que pays estes vous? <57>

Et faciat tanquam exiat beretrum cornice
("With an ironical air he makes as if to doff his hat." PH)<58>

Court. Ab. Deck your hofte and cover a louse.

Cl. Col. Say vous chanter, Venter tre dawce?<59>              760

Court. Ab. Wyda, wyda.<60>
How sayest thou, man, am not I a jolly rutter?

Cl. Col. Give this gentleman room, sirs, stand utter!<61>
By God, sir, what need all this waste?
What is this, a beetle, or a batowe or a buskin laced?<62>

Court. Ab. What, weenest thou that I know thee not, Cloaked
Collusion?

Cl. Col. And weenest thou that I know not thee, cankered Abusion?

Court. Ab. Cankered Jack Hare<63> look thou be not rusty,
For thou shalt well know I am neither dirty nor dusty.

Cl. Col. Dusty! nay, sir, ye be all of the lusty,             770
Howbeit of scape-thrift your cloaks smelleth musty:
But whither art thou walking, in faith unfeigned?

Court. Ab. Mary, with Magnificence I would be retained.

Cl. Col. By the mass, for the court thou art a meet man:
Thy slippers they swap it, yet thou footest it like a swan.

Court. Ab. Yea, so I can devise my gear after the courtly manner.

Cl. Col. So thou art personable to bear a prince's banner.
By God's foot, an I dare well fight, for I will not start.<64>

Court. Ab. Nay, thou art a man good enough but for thy false
heart.

Cl. Col. Well, an I be a coward, there is more than I.        780

Court. Ab. Yea, in faith a bold man and a hardy;

Cl. Col. A bold man in a bowl of new ale in corns.<65>

Court. Ab. Will ye see this gentleman is all in his scorns?

Cl. Col. But are ye not advised to dwell where ye spake?

Court. Ab. I am of few words, I love not to bark.<66>
Bearest thou any room,<67> or canst thou do ought?
Canst thou help in favour that I might be brought?

Cl. Col. I may do somewhat, and more I think shall.

Here cometh in CRAFTY CONVEYANCE, pointing with his finger and
sayeth

Cr. Con. Hem, Collusion!

Court. Ab. Cock's heart, who is yonder that for thee doth call?

Cr. Con. Nay, come at once, for the arms of the dice!<68>     790

Court. Ab. Cock's arms, he hath called for thee twice.

Cl. Col. By Cock's heart, and call shall again:
To come to me, I trow, he shall be fain.

Court. Ab. What, is thy heart pricked with such a proud pin?

Cl. Col. Tush, he that hath need, man, let him run.

Cr. Con. Nay, come away, man: thou playest the cayser.

Cl. Col. By the mass, thou shalt bide my leisure.

Cr. Con. Abide, sir, quod he! Mary, so I do.

Court. Ab. He will come, man, when he may tend to.

Cr. Con. What the devil, who sent for thee?                   800

Cl. Col. Here he is now, man; mayest thou not see?

Cr. Con. What the devil, man, what thou meanest?
Art thou so angry as thou seemest?

Court. Ab. What the devil, can ye agree no better?

Cr. Con. What the devil, where had we this jolly jetter?

Cl. Col. What sayest thou, man? why dost thou not supply,
And desire me thy good master to be?

Court. Ab. Speakest thou to me?

Cl. Col. Yea, so I tell thee.

Court. Ab. Cock's bones, I ne tell can                        810
Which of you is the better man,
Or which of you can do most.

Cr. Con. In faith, I rule much of the roost.

Cl. Col. Rule the roost! ye, thou wouldest <69>
As scant thou had no need of me.

Cr. Con. Need! yes, Mary, I say not nay.

Court. Ab. Cock's heart, I trow thou wilt make a fray!

Cr. Con. Nay, in good faith, it is but the guise.

Cl. Col. No, for ere we strike, we will be advised twice.<70>

Court. Ab. What the devil, use ye not to draw no swords?      820

Cr. Con. No, by my troth, but crake great words.

Court. Ab. Why, is this the guise nowadays?

Cl. Col. Yea, for surety, oft peace is taken for frays.
But, sir, I will have this man with me.

Cr. Con. Convey yourself first, let see.

Cl. Col. Well, tarry here till I for you send.

Cr. Con. Why, shall he be of your band?

Cl. Col. Tarry here: wot ye what I say?

Court. Ab. I warrant you, I will not go away.

Cr. Con. By Saint Mary, he is a tall man.                     830

Cl. Col. Yea, and do right good service he can.
I know in him no default,
But that the whoreson is proud and haut.

And so they (i.e. CLOAKED COLLUSION and CRAFTY CONVEYANCE) go out
of the place.

Court. Ab. Nay, purchase ye a pardon for the pose,
For pride hath plucked thee by the nose,
As well as me. I would, an I durst,
But now I will not say the worst.

COURTLY ABUSION alone in the place

What now, let see,
Who looketh on me
Well round about,                                             840
How gay and how stout
That I can wear
Courtly my gear:
My hair busheth<71>
So pleasantly,
My robe rusheth
So ruttingly,
Meseem I fly,
I am so light,
To dance delight;<72>                                         850
Properly dressed,
All point-device,
My person prest,
Beyond all size
Of the new guise,
To rush it out
In every rout:
Beyond measure
My sleeve is wide,<73>
All of pleasure,                                              860
My hose strait tied,
My buskin wide
Rich to behold,
Glittering in gold.
Abusion,
Forsooth I hight;
Confusion
Shall on him light,
By day or by night
That useth me;                                                870
He cannot thé.
A very fon,
A very ass,
Will take upon
To compass
That never was
Abused before;
A very poor
That so will do,
He doth abuse                                                 880
Himself too too,<74>
He doth misuse
Each man take a fee <75>
To crake and prate;
I befoul his pate.
This new fon jet
From out of France<76>
First I did set;
Made purveyance
And such ordinance,                                           890
That all men it found
Throughout England;
All this nation
I set on fire
In my fashion,
This their desire,
This new attire;
This ladies have,
I it them gave;
Spare for no cost;                                            900
And yet indeed
It is cost lost
Much more than need
For to exceed
In such array:
Howbeit, I say,
A carle's son,
Brought up of nought,
With me will wonne
Whilst he hath aught;                                         910
He will have wrought
His gown so wide
That he may hide
His dam and his sire
Within his sleeve;
Spend all his hire
That men him give.
Wherefore I preve,
A Tyburn check<77>
Shall break his neck.                                         920

Here cometh in FANCY, crying, Stow, stow!

All is out of harre,<78>
And out of trace,
Aye warre and warre
In every place.
But what the devil art thou,
That criest Stow, stow?

Fan. What, whom have we here, Jenkin Jolly?
Now welcome, by the God holy.

Court. Ab. What, Fancy, my friend! how dost thou fare?

Fan. By Christ, as merry as a March hare.                     930

Court. Ab. What the devil hast thou on thy fist, an owl?

Fan. Nay, it is a farly fowl.

Court. Ab. Methink she frowneth and looks sour.

Fan. Turd, man, it is an hawk of the tower;<79>
She is made for the mallard fat.

Court. Ab. Methink she is well-beaked to catch a rat.
But now what tidings can you tell, let see.

Fan. Mary, I am come for thee.

Court. Ab. For me?

Fan. Yea, for thee, so I say.                                 940

Court. Ab. How so? tell me, I thee pray.

Fan. Why, heard you not of the fray
That fell among us this same day?

Court. Ab. No, mary, not yet.

Fan. What the devil, never a whit?

Court. Ab. No, by the mass; what should I swear?

Fan. In faith, Liberty is now a lusty spere.

Court. Ab. Why, under whom was he abiding?

Fan. Mary, Measure had him a while in guiding,
Till, as the devil would, they fell a-chiding                 950
With Crafty Conveyance.

Court. Ab. Yea, did they so?

Fan. Yea, by God's sacrament, and with other mo.

Court. Ab. What needed that, in the devil's date?<80>

Fan. Yes, yes, he fell with me also at debate.

Court. Ab. With thee also? what, he playeth the state?<81>

Fan. Yea, but I bade him pike out of the gate,
By God's body, so did I.

Court. Ab. By the mass, well done, and boldly.

Fan. Hold thy peace, Measure shall from us walk.              960

Court. Ab. Why, is he crossed then with a chalk?

Fan. Crossed! yea, checked out of conceit.

Court. Ab. How so?

Fan. By God, by a pretty sleight. 
As hereafter thou shalt know more:
But I must tarry here, go thou before.

Court. Ab. With whom shall I there meet?

Fan. Crafty Conveyance standeth in the street,
Even of purpose for the same.

Court. Ab. Yea, but what shall I call my name?                970

Fan. Cock's heart, turn thee, let me see thine array:
Cock's bones, this is all of John de Gay.

Court. Ab. So I am pointed after my conceit.

Fan. Mary, thou jettest it of height.<82>

Court. Ab. Yea, but of my name let us be wise.<83>

Fan. Mary, Lusty Pleasure, by mine advice,
To name thyself. Come off, it were done.<84>

Court. Ab. Farewell, my friend.

Fan. Adieu, till soon.

[Here COURTLY ABUSION goes out].

Stow, bird, stow, stow!                                       980
It is best I feed my hawk now.
There is many evil favoured, an thou be foul;<85>
Each thing is fair when it is young: all hail, owl!

Lo, this is
My fancy, ywis:
Now Christ it bless!
It is, by Jesse,
A bird full sweet,
For me full meet:
She is furred for the heat                                    990
All to the feet;
Her brows bent,
Her eyen glent:
From Tyne to Trent,
From Stroud to Kent,
A man shall find
Many of her kind,
How standeth the wind-
Before or behind:
Barbed like a nun,<86>                                       1000
For burning of the sun;
Her feathers dun;
Well-favoured bonne!
Now, let me see about
In all this rout
If I can find out
So seemly a snout
Among this press:
Even a whole mess-
Peace, man, peace!                                           1010
I rede, we cease.<87>
So farly fair as it looks,
And her beak so comely crooks,
Her nails sharp as tenter-hooks!
I have not kept her yet three wooks.
And how still she doth sit!
Tewit, tewit! Where is my wit?
The devil speed whit!<88>
That was before, I set behind;
Now too courteous, forthwith unkind;                         1020
Sometime too sober, sometime too sad;
Sometime too merry, sometime too mad;
Sometime I sit as I were solemn proud;
Sometime I laugh over loud;
Sometime I weep for a gee-gaw;
Sometime I laugh at wagging of a straw;
With a pear<89> my love you may win,
And ye may lese it for a pin.
I have a thing for to say,
And I may tend thereto for play;                             1030
But in faith I am so occupied
On this half and on every side,
That I wot not where I may rest.
First to tell you what were best,
Frantic Fancy-service I hight;
My wits be weak, my brains are light:
For it is I that other while
Pluck down lead, and thatch with tile;
Now I will this, and now I will that,
Make a windmill of a mat;<90>                                1040
Now I would, and I wist what.
Where is my cap? I have lost my hat;
And within an hour after
Pluck down a house, and set up a rafter;
Hither and thither, I wot not whither:
Do and undo, both together;
Of a spindle I will make a spar:
All that I make forthwith I mar;
I blunder,<91> I bluster, I blow, and I blother;
I make on the one day, and I mar on the other;               1050
Busy, busy, and ever busy,
I dance up and down till I am dizzy;
I can find fantasies where none is;
I will not have it so, I will have it this.

Hic ingrediatur FOLLY, quatiendo crema et faciendo multum,
feriendo tabulas et similia. ("Enter FOLLY, shaking his bauble,
capering about, and playing on an instrument." PH)

Fol. Masters, Christ save everichon!
What, Fancy, art thou here alone?

Fan. What, fonnish Folly! I befool thy face.

Fol. What, frantic Fancy in a fool's case!
What is this, an owl or a glede?
By my troth, she hath a great head.                          1060

Fan. Tush, thy lips hang in thine eye.<92>
It is a French butterfly.

Fol. By my troth, I trow well!
But she is less a great deal
Than a butterfly of our land.

Fan. What pilled<93> cur leadest thou in thy hand?

Fol. A pilled cur!

Fan. Yea so, I tell thee, a pilled cur!

Fol. Yet I sold his skin to Mackemurre <94>
In the stead of a budge fur.<95>                             1070

Fan. What, flayest thou his skin every year?

Fol. Yes, in faith, I thank God I may hear.

Fan. What, thou wilt cough me a daw<96> for forty pence?

Fol. Mary, sir, Cockermouth is a good way hence.

Fan. What? of Cockermouth spake I no word.

Fol. By my faith, sir the furbisher hath my sword.

Fan. Ay, I trow ye shall cough me a fool.

Fol. In faith, truth ye say, we went together to school.

Fan. Yea, but I can somewhat more of the letter.

Fol. I will not give a halfpenny for to chose the better.    1080

Fan. But, brother Folly, I wonder much of one thing,
That thou so high fro me doth spring,<97>
And I so little alway still.

Fol. By God, I can tell, and I will.
Thou art so feeble fantastical,
And so brainsick therewithal,
And thy wit wandering here and there,
That thou canst not grow out of thy boy's gear;
And as for me, I take but one foolish way,
And therefore I grow more on one day                         1090
Than thou can in years seven.

Fan. In faith, truth thou sayest now, by God of heaven!
For so with fantasies my wit doth fleet,
That wisdom and I shall seldom meet.
Now, of good fellowship, let me buy thy dog.

Fol. Cock's heart, thou liest, I am no hog.

Fan. Here is no man that called thee hog nor swine.

Fol. In faith, man, my brain is as good as thine.

Fan. The devil's turd for thy brain!

Fol. By my sire's soul, I feel no rain.                      1100

Fan. By the mass, I hold thee mad.

Fol. Mary, I knew thee when thou wast a lad.

Fan. Cock's bones, heard ye ever sic another?

Fol. Yea, a fool the t'one, and a fool the t'other.

Fan. Nay, but wottest thou what I do say?

Fol. Why, sayest thou that I was here yesterday?

Fan. Cock's arms; this is a work, I trow.

Fol. What, callest thou me a dunnish crow?

Fan. Now, in good faith, thou art a fond guest.

Fol. Yea, bear me this straw to a daw's nest.                1110

Fan. What, weenest thou that I were so foolish and so fond?

Fol. In faith, yet is there none in all England.

Fan. Yet for my fancy's sake, I say,
Let me have thy dog, whatsoever I pay.

Fol. Thou shalt have my purse, and I will have thine.

Fan. By my troth, there is mine.

Fol. Now, by my troth, man, take, there is mine<98>.
And I beshrew him that hath the worse.

Fan. Turd, I say, what have I do?
Here is nothing but the buckle of a shoe,                    1120
And in my purse was twenty mark.

Fol. Ha, ha, ha! hark, sirs, hark!
For all that my name hight Folly,
By the mass, yet art thou more fool than I.

Fan. Yet give me thy dog, and I am content;
And thou shalt have my hawk to a botchment.

Fol. That ever thou thrive, God it forfend!
For God's cope <99> thou wilt spend.
Now take thou my dog, and give me thy fowl.<100>

Fan. Hey, chish, come hither!                                1130

Fol. Nay, turd, take him by time.

Fan. What callest thou thy dog?

Fol. Tush, his name is Grime.

Fan. Come, Grime, come, Grime! It is my pretty dogs.

Fol. In faith, there is not a better dog for hogs,
Not from Alnwick unto Aungey. <101>

Fan. Yea, but trowest thou that he be not mangy?

Fol. No, by my troth, it is but the scurf and the scab.

Fan. What, he hath been hurt with a stab?

Fol. Nay, in faith, it was but a stripe                      1140
That the whoreson had for eating of a tripe.

Fan. Where the devil gat he all these hurts?

Fol. By God, for snatching of puddings and worts.

Fan. What, then, he is some good poor man's cur?

Fol. Yea, but he will in at every man's door.

Fan. Now thou hast done me a pleasure great.

Fol. In faith, I would thou hadst a marmoset.

Fan. Cock's heart, I love such japes.

Fol. Yea, for all thy mind is on owls and apes.
But I have thy poultry, and thou hast my cattle.<102>        1150

Fan. Yea, but thrift and we have made a battle.

Fol. Rememberest thou not the japes and the toys-

Fan. What, that we used when we were boys?

Fol. Yea, by the rood, even the same.

Fan. Yes, yes, I am yet as full of game
As ever I was, and as full of trifles,
Nil, nihilum, nihil anglice, nifles.<103>

Fol. What, cannest thou all this Latin yet,
And hath so mazed a wandering wit?

Fan. Tush, man, I keep some Latin in store.                  1160

Fol. By Cock's heart, I ween thou hast no more.

Fan. No? yes, in faith, I can versify.

Fol. Then I pray thee heartily,
Make a verse of my butterfly;
It forceth not of the reason, so it keep rime.

Fan. But wilt thou make another on Grime?

Fol. Nay, in faith, first let me hear thine.

Fan. Mary, as for that thou shalt soon hear mine:
Est snavi snago with a shrewd face vilis imago.<104>

Fol. Grimbaldus greedy, snatch a pudding till the roast be ready.
                                                             1170

Fan. By the heart of God, well done!

Fol. Yea, so readily and so soon!

Here cometh in CRAFTY CONVEYANCE

Cr. Con. What, Fancy! Let me see who is the other.

Fan. By God, sir, Folly, mine own sworn brother.

Cr. Con. Cock's bones, it is a farly freke:
Can he play well at the hoddypeak?<105>

Fan. Tell by thy troth what sport canst thou make.

Fol. Ah, hold thy peace: I have the tooth-ache.

Cr. Con. The tooth-ache! lo, a turd ye have.

Fol. Yea, thou hast the four quarters of a knave.            1180

Cr. Con. Wottest thou, I say, to whom thou speaks?

Fan. Nay, by Cock's heart, he ne recks,
For he will speak to Magnificence thus.

Cr. Con. Cock's arms, a meet man for us.

Fol. What, would ye have more fools, and are so many?

Fan. Nay, offer him a counter instead of a penny.

Cr. Con. Why, thinkest thou he can no better skill?

Fol. In faith, I can make ye both fools, an I will.

Cr. Con. What hast thou on thy fist-a kestrel?

Fol. Nay, ywis, fool, it is a dotterel.                      1190

Cr. Con. In a coat thou can play well the disour.<106>

Fol. Yea, but thou can play the fool without a visor.

Fan. How rode he by you? how put he you? <107>

Cr. Con. Mary, as thou sayest, he gave me a blur.
But where got you that mangy cur?

Fan. Mary, it was his, and now it is mine.

Cr. Con. And was it his, and now it is thine?
Thou must have thy fancy and thy will,
But yet thou shalt hold me a fool still.

Fol. Why, weenest thou that I cannot make thee play the fon?
                                                             1200

Fan. Yes, by my faith, good Sir John.<108>

Cr. Con. For you both it were enough.

Fol. Why, weenest thou that I were as much a fool as thou?

Fan. Nay, nay, thou shalt find him another manner of man.

Fol. In faith, I can do masteries, so I can.

Cr. Con. What canst thou do but play cockwat?<109>

Fan. Yes, yes, he will make thee eat a gnat.

Fol. Yes, yes, by my troth, I hold thee a groat
That I shall laugh thee out of thy coat.

Cr. Con. Then will I say that thou hast no peer.             1210

Fan. Now, by the rood, and he will go near.

Fol. Hem, Fancy, regardez, voyez. <110>

Here FOLLY maketh semblaunt to take a louse from CRAFTY
CONVEYANCE'S shoulder.

Fan. What hast thou found there?

Fol. By God, a louse.

Cr. Con. By Cock's heart, I trow thou liest.

Fol. By the mass, a Spanish moth with a gray list.

Fan. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!

Cr. Con. Cock's arms, it is not so, I trow.

Here CRAFTY CONVEYANCE putteth off his gown.

Fol. Put on thy gown again, for now thou hast lost. <111>

Fan. Lo, John of Bonam,<112> where is thy brain?             1220
Now put on, fool, thy coat again.

Fol. Give me my groat, for thou hast lost.


Here FOLLY maketh semblaunt to take money of CRAFTY CONVEYANCE,
saying to him

Shut thy purse, daw, and do no cost.

Fan. Now hast thou not a proud mock and a stark?

Cr. Con. With, yes, by the rood of Woodstock Park.

Fan. Nay, I tell thee, he maketh no doubts
To turn a fool out of his clouts.

Cr. Con. And for a fool a man would him take.

Fol. Nay, it is I that fools can make;
For be he cayser or be he king,                              1230
To fellowship with Folly I can him bring.

Fan. Nay, wilt thou hear now of his schools,
And what manner of people he maketh fools?

Cr. Con. Yea, let us hear a word or twain.

Fol. Sir, of my manner I shall tell you the plain.
First I lay before them my bauble,
And teach them how they should sit idle,
To pick their fingers all the day long;
So in their ear I sing them a song,
And make them so long to muse,                               1240
That some of them runneth straight to the stews;
To theft and bribery<113> I make some fall,
And pick a lock and climb a wall;
And where I spy a nysot gay,
That will sit idle all the day,
And cannot set herself to work,
I kindle in her such a lither spark
That rubbed she must be on the gall
Between the tapet and the wall.

Cr. Con. What, whoreson, art thou such a one?                1250

Fan. Nay, beyond all other set him alone.

Cr. Con. Hast thou any more? Let see, proceed.

Fol. Yea, by God, sir, for a need
I have another manner of sort,
That I laugh at for my disport;
And those be they that come up of nought,
As some be not far, an if it were well sought:
Such daws, whatsoever they be
That be set in authority,
Anon he waxeth so high and proud,                            1260
He frowneth fiercely, brimly browed,<114>
The knave would make it coy, an he could;
All that he doth must be allowed;
And, This is not well done, sir, take heed;
And maketh him busy where is no need:
He dances so long, hey, trolly lolly,
That every man laugheth at his folly.

Cr. Con. By the good Lord, truth he saith.

Fan. Thinkest thou not so, by thy faith?

Cr. Con. Think I not so! quod he. Else have I shame,         1270
For I know divers that useth the same.

Fol. But now, forsooth, man, it maketh no matter,
For they that will so busily smatter,
So help me God, man, ever at the length
I make him lose much of their strength;<115>
For with folly so do I them lead,
That wit he wanteth when he hath most need.

Fan. Forsooth, tell on: hast thou any mo?

Fol. Yes, I shall tell you, ere I go,
Of divers mo that haunteth my schools.                       1280

Cr. Con. All men beware of such fools!

Fol. There be two lither, rude and rank,
Simkin Titivell<116> and Pierce Pykthank;
These lithers I learn them for to lere
What he saith and she saith to lay good ear,
And tell to his sovereign every whit,
And then he is much made of for his wit;
And, be the matter ill more or less,
He will make it mickle worse than it is:
But all that he doth, and if he reckon well,                 1290
It is but folly every deal.

Fan. Are not his words cursedly couched?

Cr. Con. By God, there be some that be shrewdly touched:
But, I say, let see an if thou have any more.

Fol. I have an whole armoury of such haberdash in store;
For there be others that folly doth use,
That follow fond fantasies and virtue refuse.

Fan. Nay, this is my part that thou speakest of now.

Fol. So is all the remnant, I make God avow;
For thou formest such fantasies in their mind,               1300
That every man almost groweth out of kind.

Cr. Con. By the mass, I am glad that I came hither,
To hear you two rutters dispute together.

Fan. Nay, but Fancy must be either first or last.

Fol. But when Folly cometh, all is past.

Fan. I wot not whether it cometh of thee or of me.
But all is folly that I can see.

Cr. Con. Mary, sir, ye may swear it on a book.

Fol. Yea, turn over the leaf, read there and look,
How frantic Fancy first of all                               1310
Maketh man and woman in folly to fall.

Cr. Con. A, sir, a, a! Howe<117> by that!

Fan. A perilous thing to cast a cat
Upon a naked man, an if she scrat.

Fol. Soho, I say, the hare is squat!
For, frantic Fancy, thou makest man mad;
And I, Folly, bringeth them to qui fuit gad,<118>
With qui fuit, brain-sick, I have them brought,
From qui fuit aliquid, to sheer shaking nought.<119>

Cr. Con. Well argued and surely on both sides:               1320
But for thee, Fancy, Magnificence abides.

Fan. Why, shall I not have Folly with me also?

Cr. Con. Yes, pardie, man, whether that ye ride or go:
Yet for his name we must find a sleight.<120>

Fan. By the mass, he shall hight Conceit.

Cr. Con. Not a better name under the sun:
With Magnificence thou shalt won.

Fol. God have mercy, good godfather.

Cr. Con. Yet I would that he had gone rather;
For, as soon as ye come in Magnificence' sight,              1330
All measure and good rule is gone quite.

Fan. And shall we have liberty to do what we will?

Cr. Con. Riot at liberty rusheth it out still.

Fol. Yea, but tell me one thing.

Cr. Con. What is that?

Fol. Who is master of the mash-vat?

Fan. Yea, for he hath a full dry soul.

Cr. Con. Cock's arms, thou shalt keep the brewhouse bowl.

Fol. But may I drink thereof whilst that I stare?

Cr. Con. When Measure is gone, what needest thou spare?      1340
When Measure is gone, we may slay care.

Fol. Now then go we hence. Away the mare!<121>

Here FOLLY and FANCY go out.

CRAFTY CONVEYANCE alone in the place.

Cr. Con. It is wonder to see the world about,
To see what folly is used in every place;
Folly hath a room, I say, in every rout,<122>
To put, where he list, Folly hath free chase;
Folly and Fancy all where, every man doth face and brace;<123>
Folly footeth it properly, Fancy leadeth the dance;
And next come I after, Crafty Conveyance.
Whoso to me giveth good advertence,                          1350
Shall see many things done craftily:
By me conveyed is wanton insolence,
Privy 'pointments conveyed so properly,
For many times much kindness is denied
For dread that we dare not oft lest we be spied;
By me is conveyed mickle pretty ware,
Sometime, I say, behind the door for need;
I have an hobby can make larks to dare;<124>
I knit together many a broken thread.
It is great alms the hungry to feed,                         1360
To clothe the naked where is lacking a smock,
Trim at her tail, ere a man can turn a sock:
What ho, be ye merry! was it not well conveyed?
As oft as ye list, so honesty be saved;
Alas, dear heart, look that we be not perceived!
Without craft nothing is well behaved;
Though I shew you courtesy, say not that I crave <125>,
Yet convey it craftily, and hardly spare not for me,
So that there know no man, but I and she.
Theft also and petty bribery                                 1370
Without me be full oft espied;
My inwit dealing there can no man descry,
Convey it by craft, lift and lay aside.
Full much flattery and falsehood I hide,
And by crafty conveyance I will, an I can,
Save a strong thief and hang a true man.
But some men would convey, and can not skill,
As malapert taverners that check with their betters,
Their conveyance welteth the work all by will;
And some will take upon them to counterfeit letters,         1380
And therewithal convey himself into a pair of fetters;
And some will convey by the pretence of sadness,
Till all their conveyance is turned into madness.
Crafty conveyance is no child's game:
By crafty conveyance many one is brought up of nought;
Crafty Conveyance can cloak himself from shame,
For by crafty conveyance wonderful things are wrought.
By conveyance crafty I have brought
Unto Magnificence a full ungracious sort,
For all hooks unhappy<126> to me have resort.                1390

Here cometh in MAGNIFICENCE with LIBERTY and FELICITY.

Magn. Trust me, Liberty, it grieveth me right sore
To see you thus ruled and stand in such awe.

Lib. Sir, as by my will, it shall be so no more.

Fel. Yet Liberty without rule is not worth a straw.

Magn. Tush, hold your peace, ye speak like a daw!
Ye shall be occupied, Wealth, at my will.

Cr. Con. All that ye say, sir, is reason and skill.

Magn. Master Surveyor, where have ye been so long?
Remember ye not how my Liberty by Measure ruled was?

Cr. Con. In good faith, sir, meseemeth he had the more wrong.
                                                             1400

Lib. Mary, sir, so did he exceed and pass,
They drove me to learning like a dull ass.

Fel. It is good yet that Liberty be ruled by reason.

Magn. Tush, hold your peace, ye speak out of season:
Yourself shall be ruled by Liberty and Largesse.

Fel. I am content, so it in measure be.

Lib. Must Measure, in the mare's name, you furnish and dress?

Magn. Nay, nay, not so, my friend Felicity.

Cr. Con. Not, an your grace would be ruled by me.

Lib. Nay, he shall be ruled even as I list.                  1410

Fel. Yet it is good to beware of Had I wist.<127>

Magn. Sir, by Liberty and Largesse I will that ye shall
Be governed and guided: wot ye what I say?
Master Surveyor, Largesse to me call.

Cr. Con. It shall be done.

Magn. Yea, but bid him come away
At once, and let him not tarry all day.

Here goeth out CRAFTY CONVEYANCE.

Fel. Yet it is good wisdom to work wisely by wealth.

Lib. Hold thy tongue, an thou love thy health.

Magn. What, will ye waste wind, and prate thus in vain?      1420
Ye have eaten sauce,<128> I trow, at the Tailors' Hall.

Lib. Be not too bold, my friend; I counsel you, bear a brain.<129>

Magn. And whatso we say, hold you content withal.

Fel. Sir, yet without sapience your substance may be small;
For, where is no measure, how many worship endure?

Here cometh in FANCY.

Fan. Sir, I am here at your pleasure;
Your Grace sent for me, I ween; what is your will?

Magn. Come hither, Largesse, take here Felicity.

Fan. Why, ween you that I can keep him long still?

Magn. To rule as ye list, lo here is Liberty!                1430

Lib. I am here ready.

Fan. What, shall we have Wealth at our guiding to rule as we list?
Then farewell thrift, by Him that cross kissed!

Fel. I trust your Grace will be agreeable
That I shall suffer none impeachment
By their demeanance, nor loss reprovable.

Magn. Sir, ye shall follow mine appetite and intent.

Fel. So it be by measure I am right well content.

Fan. What, all by measure, good sir, and none excess?

Lib. Why, wealth hath made many a man brainless.             1440

Fel. That was by the means of too much liberty.

Magn. What, can ye agree thus and appose?<130>

Fel. Sir, as I say, there was no fault in me.

Lib. Yea, of Jack-a-Thrum's bible<131> can ye make a glose?

Fan. Sore said, I tell you, and well to the purpose:
What should a man do with you? Lock you under key?

Fel. I say, it is folly to give all wealth away.

Lib. Whether should Wealth be ruled by Liberty,
Or Liberty by Wealth? Let see, tell me that.

Fel. Sir, as me seemeth, ye should be ruled by me.           1450

Magn. What need you with him thus prate and chat?

Fan. Show us your mind then, how to do and what.

Magn. I say, that I will ye have him in guiding.

Lib. Master Felicity, let be your chiding,
And so, as ye see it will be no better,
Take it in worth<132> such as you find.

Fan. What the devil, man, your name shall be the greater,
For Wealth without Largesse is all out of kind.

Lib. And Wealth is nought worth if Liberty be behind.

Magn. Now hold ye content, for there is none other shift.    1460

Fel. Then waste must be welcome, and farewell thrift!

Magn. Take of his substance a sure inventory,
And get thou <133> home together; for Liberty shall bide,
And wait upon me.

Lib. And yet for a memory,
Make indentures how ye and I shall guide.

Fan. I can do nothing but he stand beside.

Lib. Sir, we can do nothing the one without the other.

Magn. Well, get you hence then, and send me some other.

Fan. Whom? lusty Pleasure, or merry Conceit?                 1470

Magn. Nay, first lusty Pleasure is my desire to have,
And let the other another await,<134>
Howbeit that fond fellow is a merry knave;
But look that ye occupy the authority that I you gave.

Here goeth out FELICITY, LIBERTY, and FANCY.

MAGNIFICENCE alone in the place

Magn. For now, sirs, I am like as a prince should be:<135>
I have Wealth at will, Largesse and Liberty:
Fortune to her laws cannot abandon me,<136>
But I shall of Fortune rule the rein;
I fear nothing Fortune's perplexity;
All honour to me must needs stoop and lean;                  1480
I sing of two parts without a mean;
I have wind and weather over all to sail,
No stormy rage against me can prevail.
Alexander, of Macedony king,
That all the orient had in subjection,
Though all his conquests were brought to reckoning,
Might seem right well under my protection
To reign, for all his martial affection;
For I am Prince Peerless, proud of port,
Bathed with bliss, embraced with comfort.                    1490
Cyrus, that solemn sire of Babylon,
That Israel released of their captivity,
For all his pomp, for all his royal throne,
He may not be compared unto me.
I am the diamond doubtless of dignity:
Surely it is I that all may save and spill;
No man so hardy to work against my will.
Porsena, the proud provost of Turkey land,
That rated the Romans and made them ill rest,
Nor Caesar July, that no man might withstand,                1500
Were never half so richly as I am dressed:
No, that I assure you: look who was the best.
I reign in my robes, I rule as me list,
I drive down these dastards with a dint of my fist.
Of Cato the count accounted the Khan,
Darius, the doughty chieftain of Perse,
I set not by the proudest of them a prawn,
Ne by none other, that any man can rehearse.
I follow in felicity without reverse.
I dread no danger, I dance all in delight:                   1510
My name is Magnificence, man most of might.
Hercules the hardy, with his stubborn clubbed mace,
That made Cerberus to couch, the cur dog of hell,
And Theseus, that proud was Pluto to face,
It would not become them with me for to mell:
For of all barons bold I bear the bell,
Of all doughty, I am doughtiest duke, as I deem:
To me all princes to lout may be seen.<137>
Charlemagne, that maintained the nobles of France,
Arthur of Albion, for all, his brim beard,                   1520
Nor Basian the bold, for all his bribance,<138>
Nor Alaric, that ruled the Gothiance<139> by sword,
Nor no man on mould<140> can make me afeared.
What man is so mazed with me that dare meet,
I shall flap him as a fool to fall at my feet.
Galba, whom his gallants garred for to gasp,<141>
Nor Nero, that neither set by God nor man,
Nor Vespasian, that bore in his nose a wasp,<142>
Nor Hannibal against Rome gates that ran,
Nor yet Scipio, that noble Carthage won,                     1530
Nor none so hardy of them with me that durst crake,
But I shall frounce them on the foretop,<143> and gar them to
quake.

Here cometh in COURTLY ABUSION, doing reverence and curtsey.

Court. Ab. At your commandment, sir, with all due reverence.

Magn. Welcome, Pleasure, to our magnificence.

Court. Ab. Pleaseth it your Grace to show what I do shall?

Magn. Let us hear of your pleasure to pass the time withal.

Court. Ab. Sir, then, with the favour of your benign sufferance
To show you my mind myself I will advance,
If it like your Grace to take it in degree.<144>

Magn. Yes, sir, so good man in you I see,                    1540
And in your dealing so good assurance,
That we delight greatly in your dalliance.

Court. Ab. Ah, sir, your Grace me doth extol and raise,
And far beyond my merits ye me commend and praise;
Howbeit, I would be right glad, I you assure,
Any thing to do that might be to your pleasure.

Magn. As I be saved, with pleasure I am surprised
Of your language, it is so well devised;
Polished and fresh is your ornacy.

Court. Ab. I would to God that I were half so crafty,        1550
Or in elect utterance<145> half so eloquent,
As that I might your noble Grace content!

Magn. Trust me, with you I am highly pleased,
For in my favour I have you fiefed and seised.<146>
He is not living your manners can amend;
Mary, your speech is as pleasant as though it were penned;
To hear your commune, it is my high comfort;
Point-device all pleasure is your port.

Court. Ab. Sir, I am the better of your noble report;
But, of your patience under the support,                     1560
If it would like you to hear my poor mind-

Magn. Speak, I beseech thee, leave nothing behind.

Court. Ab. So as ye be a prince of great might,
It is seeming your pleasure ye delight,
And to acquaint you with carnal delectation,
And to fall in acquaintance with every new fashion;
And quickly your appetites to sharpen and address,
To fasten your fancy upon a fair mistress,
That quickly is envived with ruddies of the rose,<147>
Inpurtured with features after your purpose,                 1570
The strains of her veins<148> as azure Indy blue,
Enbudded with beauty and colour fresh of hue,
As lily-white to look upon her lere,
Her eyen relucent as carbuncle so clear,
Her mouth embalmed, delectable and merry,
Her lusty lips ruddy as the cherry:
How like you? ye lack, sir, such a lusty lass.

Magn. Ah, that were a baby to brace and to bass!
I would I had, by Him that hell did harrow,<149>
With me in keeping such a Philip Sparrow!                    1580
I would hawk whilst my head did wark,<150>
So I might hobby for such a lusty lark.<151>
These words in mine ear they be so lustily spoken,
That on such a female my flesh would be wroken;
They touch me so thoroughly, and tickle my conceit,
That wearied I would be on such a bait:
Ah, Cock's arms, where might such one be found?

Court. Ab. Will ye spend any money?

Magn. Yea, a thousand pound.

Court. Ab. Nay, nay, for less I warrant you to be sped,<152>
                                                             1590
And brought home, and laid in your bed.

Magn. Would money, trowest thou, make such one to the call?<153>

Court. Ab. Money maketh merchants, I tell you, over all.

Magn. Why, will a mistress be won for money and for gold?

Court. Ab. Why, was not for money Troy both bought and sold?
Full many a strong city and town hath been won
By the means of money without any gun.
A mistress, I tell you, is but a small thing;
A goodly ribbon, or a gold ring,
May win with a saute the fortress of the hold;               1600
But one thing I warn you, press forth and be bold.

Magn. Yea, but some be full coy and passing hard-hearted.

Court. Ab. But, blessed be our Lord, they will be soon converted.

Magn. Why, will they then be entreated, the most and the least?

Court. Ab. Yea, for omnis mulier meretrix, si celari potest.<154>

Magn. Ah, I have spied ye can much brooken sorrow.

Court. Ab. I could hold you with such talk hence till tomorrow;
But if it like your Grace, more at large
Me to permit my mind to discharge,
I would yet show you further of my conceit.                  1610

Magn. Let see what ye say, show it straight.

Court. Ab. Wisely let these words in your mind be weighed:
By wayward wilfulness let each thing be conveyed;
Whatsoever ye do, follow your now will;
Be it reason or none, it shall not greatly skill;
Be it right or wrong, by the advice of me,
Take your pleasure and use free liberty;
And if you see anything against your mind,
Then some occasion of quarrel ye must find,
And frown it and face it, as though ye would fight,          1620
Fret yourself for anger and for despite;
Hear no man, whatsoever they say,
But do as ye list, and take your own way.

Magn. Thy words and my mind oddly well accord.

Court. Ab. What should ye do else? are not you a lord?
Let your lust and liking stand for a law;
Be wresting and writhing, and away draw.
An ye see a man that with him ye be not pleased,
And that your mind cannot well be eased,
As if a man fortune to touch you on the quick,               1630
Then feign yourself diseased and make yourself sick:
To stir up your stomach you must you forge,
Call for a caudle and cast up your gorge,<155>
With 'Cock's arms, rest shall I none have
Till I be revenged on that whoreson knave!
Ah, how my stomach wambleth! I am all in a sweat!
Is there no whoreson that knave that will beat?'

Magn. By Cock's wounds, a wonder fellow thou art;
For ofttimes such a wambling goeth over my heart;
Yet I am not heart-sick, but that me list                    1640
For mirth I have him curried, beaten, and blist,<156>
Him that I loved not and made him to lout,
I am forthwith as whole as a trout;
For such abusion I use now and then.

Court. Ab. It is none abusion, sir, in a noble man,
It is a princely pleasure and a lordly mind;
Such lusts at large may not be left behind.

Here cometh in CLOAKED COLLUSION with MEASURE.

Cl. Col. Stand still here, and ye shall see
That for your sake I will fall on my knee.

Court. Ab. Sir, Sober Sadness cometh, wherefore it be?       1650

Magn. Stand up, sir, ye are welcome to me.

Cl. Col. Please it your Grace, at the contemplation<157>
Of my poor instance and supplication,
Tenderly to consider in your advertence,
Of our blessed Lord, sir, at the reverence,
Remember the good service that Measure hath you done,
And that ye will not cast him away so soon.

Magn. My friend, as touching to this your motion,
I may say to you I have but small devotion;
Howbeit, at your instance I will the rather                  1660
Do as much as for mine own father.

Cl. Col. Nay, sir, that affection ought to be reserved, 
For of your Grace I have it nought deserved;
But if it like you that I might rowne in your ear
To show you my mind, I would have the less fear.

Magn. Stand a little aback, sir, and let him come hither.

Court. Ab. With a good will, sir, God speed you both together.

Cl. Col. Sir, so it is: this man is hereby,
That for him to labour he hath prayed me heartily;
Notwithstanding to you be it said,                           1670
To trust in me he is but deceived;
For, so help me God, for you he is not meet:
I speak the softlier, because he should not weet.

Magn. Come hither, Pleasure, you shall hear mine intent.
Measure, ye know well, with him I cannot be content,
And surely, as I am now advised,
I will have him reheted and despised.<158>
How say ye, sirs, herein what is best?

Court. Ab. By mine advice with you, in faith, he shall not rest.

Cl. Col. Yet, sir, reserved your better advisement,          1680
It were better he spake with you ere he went,
That he know not but that I have supplied
All that I can his matter for to speed.<159>

Magn. Now, by your troth, gave he you not a bribe?

Cl. Col. Yes, with his hand I made him to subscribe
A bill of record for an annual rent.

Court. Ab. But for all that he is like to have a glent.<160>

Cl. Col. Yea, by my troth, I shall warrant you for me,
An he go to the devil, so that I may have my fee,
What care I?                                                 1690

Magn. By the mass, well said.

Court. Ab. What force ye, so that ye be paid?

Cl. Col. But yet, lo, I would, ere that he went,
Lest that he thought that his money were evil spent,
That ye would look on him, though it were not long.

Magn. Well canst thou help a priest to sing a song!

Cl. Col. So it is all the manner nowadays,
For to use such hafting and crafty ways.

Court. Ab. He telleth you truth, sir, as I you ensure.

Magn. Well, for thy sake the better I may endure             1700
That he come hither, and to give him a look
That he shall like the worse all this woke.

Cl. Col. I care not how soon he be refused,
So that I may craftily be excused.

Court. Ab. Where is he?

Cl. Col. Mary, I made him abide,
Whilst I came to you, a little here beside.

Magn. Well, call him, and let us hear him reason,
And we will be communing in the mean season.

Court. Ab. This is a wise man, sir, wheresoever ye him had.  1710

Magn. An honest person, I tell you, and a sad.

Court. Ab. He can full craftily this matter bring about.

Magn. Whilst I have him, I need nothing doubt.

Hic introducat COLLUSION MEASURE, MAGNIFICENCE aspectante vultu
elatissimo
("CLOAKED COLLUSION brings MEASURE forward, while MAGNIFICENCE
looks on him very loftily." PH )

Cl. Col. By the mass, I have done that I can,
And more than ever I did for any man:
I trow, ye heard yourself what I said.

Meas. Nay, indeed; but I saw how ye prayed,
And made instance for me by likelihood.

Cl. Col. Nay, I tell you, I am not wont to fode
Them that dare put their trust in me;                        1720
And thereof ye shall a larger proof see.

Meas. Sir, God reward you as ye have deserved:
But think you with Magnificence I shall be reserved?

Cl. Col. By my troth, I cannot tell you that;
But, an I were as ye, I would not set a gnat<161>
By Magnificence, nor yet none of his,
For, go when ye shall, of you shall he miss.

Meas. Sir, as ye say.

Cl. Col. Nay, come on with me:
Yet once again I shall fall on my knee                       1730
For your sake, whatsoever befall;
I set not a fly, and all go to all.

Meas. The Holy Ghost be with your Grace.

Cl. Col. Sir, I beseech you, let pity have some place
In your breast towards this gentleman.

Magn. I was your good lord till that ye began
So masterfully upon you for to take
With my servants, and such masteries gan make,<162>
That wholly my mind with you is miscontent;
Wherefore I will that ye be resident                         1740
With me no longer.

Cl. Col. Say somewhat now, let see, for yourself.<163>

Meas. Sir, if I might permitted be,
I would to you say a word or twain.

Magn. What, wouldst thou, lurdan, with me brawl again?
Have him hence, I say, out of my sight;
That day I see him I shall be worse all night.

Here MEASURE goeth out of the place [with COURTLY ABUSION, who, as
he carries him off, exclaims]

Court. Ab. Hence, thou haynard, out of the doors fast!

Magn. Alas, my stomach fareth as it would cast!

Cl. Col. Abide, sir, abide, let me hold your head.           1750

Magn. A bowl or a basin, I say, for God's bread!
Ah, my head! But is the whoreson gone?
God give him a mischief! Nay, now let me alone.

Cl. Col. A good drift, sir, a pretty feat:
By the good Lord, yet your temples beat.

Magn. Nay, so God me help, it was no great vexation,
For I am panged ofttimes of this same fashion.

Cl. Col. Cock's arms, how Pleasure plucked him forth!

Magn. Yea, walk he must, it was no better worth.

Cl. Col. Sir, now methink your heart is well eased.          1760

Magn. Now Measure is gone I am the better pleased.

Cl. Col. So to be ruled by Measure, it is a pain.

Magn. Mary, I ween he would not be glad to come again.

Cl Col. So I wot not what he should do here:
Where men's bellies is measured, there is no cheer;
For I hear but few men that give any praise
Unto Measure, I say, nowadays.

Magn. Measure, tut! what, the devil of hell!
Scantly one with Measure that will dwell.

Cl. Col. Not among noble men, as the world goeth:            1770
It is no wonder therefore though ye be wroth
With Measure. Where all nobleness is, there I have passed:
They catch that catch may, keep and hold fast, 
Out of all measure themselves to enrich;
No force what though his neighbour die in a ditch.
With polling and plucking out of all measure,
Thus must ye stuff and store your treasure.

Magn. Yet sometime, pardie, I must use largesse.

Cl. Col. Yea, Mary, sometime in a mess of verjuice,
As in a trifle or in a thing of nought,                      1780
As giving a thing that ye never bought:
It is the guise now, I say, over all;
Largesse in words, for rewards are but small:
To make faire promise, what are ye the worse?
Let me have the rule of your purse.

Magn. I have taken it to Largesse and Liberty.

Cl. Col. Then it is done as it should be.
But use your largesse by the advice of me,
And I shall warrant you wealth and liberty.

Magn. Say on, methink your reasons be profound.              1790

Cl. Col. Sir, of my counsel this shall be the ground:
To choose out ii-iii of such as you love best,
And let all your fancies upon them rest;
Spare for no cost to give them pound and penny,
Better to make iii rich than for to make many;
Give them more than enough and let them not lack,
And as for all other let them truss and pack;
Pluck from an hundred, and give it to three,
Let neither patent 'scape them nor fee;
And wheresoever you will fall to a reckoning,                1800
Those three will be ready even at your beckoning,
For them shall you have at liberty to lout;
Let them have all, and the other go without:
Thus joy without measure you shall have.

Magn. Thou sayst truth, by the heart that God me gave!
For, as thou sayst, right so shall it be:
And here I make thee upon Liberty
To be supervisor, and on Largesse also,
For as thou wilt, so shall the game go;
For in Pleasure, and Surveyance, and also in thee            1810
I have set my whole felicity,
And such as you will shall lack no promotion.

Cl. Col. Sir, sith that in me ye have such devotion,
Committing to me and to my fellows twain
Your wealth and felicity, I trust we shall obtain
To do you service after your appetite.

Magn. In faith, and your service right well I shall requite;
And therefore hie you hence, and take this oversight.

Cl. Col. Now, Jesu preserve you, sir, prince most of might!

Here goeth CLOAKED COLLUSION away, and leaveth MAGNIFICENCE alone
in the place.

Magn. Thus, I say, I am environed with solace;               1820
I dread no dints of fatal destiny.
Well were that lady might stand in my grace,
Me to embrace and love most specially:
Ah, Lord, so I would halse her heartily,
So I would clip her, so I would kiss her sweet!

Here cometh in FOLLY

Fol. Mary, Christ grant ye catch no cold on your feet!

Magn. Who is this?

Fol. Conceit, sir, your own man.

Magn. What tidings with you, sir? I befool thy brain-pan!

Fol. By our lakin, sir, I have been a hawking for the wild swan.
                                                             1830
My hawk is ramage,<164> and it happed that she ran,
Flew I should say, into an old barn
To reach at a rat, I could not her warn;
She pinched her pinion, by God, and catched harm:
It was a runner; nay, fool, I warrant her blood warm!

Magn. Ah, sir, thy gyrfalcon and thou be hanged together!

Fol. And, sir, as I was coming to you hither,
I saw a fox suck on a cow's udder,
And with a lime-rod I took them both together.
I trow it be a frost, for the way is slidder:                1840
See, for God avow, for cold as I chitter.

Magn. Thy words hang together as feathers in the wind.<165>

Fol. Ah, sir, told I not you how I did find
A knave and a churl, and all of one kind?
I saw a weathercock wag with the wind;
Great marvel I had, and mused in my mind;
The hounds ran before, and the hare behind;
I saw a losel lead a lurdan, and they were both blind;
I saw a souter go to supper ere ever he had dined.

Magn. By Cock's heart, thou art a fine merry knave.          1850

Fol. I make God avow, ye will none other men have.<166>

Magn. What sayest thou?

Fol. Mary, I pray God your mastership to save:
I shall give you a gaud of a gosling that I gave,<167>
The gander and the goose both grazing on one grave;
Then Rowland the reeve ran, and I began to rave,
And with a bristle of a boar his beard did I shave.

Magn. If ever I heard such another, God give me shame.

Fol. Sim Saddlegoose was my sire, and Dawcock<168> my dam:
I could, an I list, gar you laugh at a game,                 1860
How a woodcock wrestled with a lark that was lame:
The bittern said boldly that they were to blame;
The fieldfare would have fiddled, and it would not frame;
The crane and the curlew thereat gan to grame;
The snipe snivelled in the snout and smiled at the game.

Magn. Cock's bones, heard you ever such another.

Fol. See, sir, I beseech you, Largesse my brother.

Here FANCY cometh in.

Magn. What tidings with you, sir, that you look so sad?

Fan. When ye know what I know ye will not be glad.           1870

Fol. What, Brother Brainsick, how farest thou?

Magn. Yea, let be thy japes, and tell me how
The case requireth.

Fan. Alas, alas, an heavy meeting!
I would tell you, an if I might for weeping.

Fol. What, is all your mirth now turned to sorrow?
Farewell till soon, adieu till to-morrow.

Here goeth FOLLY away.

Magn. I pray thee, Largesse, let be thy sobbing.

Fan. Alas, sir, ye are undone with stealing and robbing!
Ye sent us a supervisor for to take heed:
Take heed of yourself, for now ye have need.                 1880

Magn. What, hath Sadness beguiled me so?

Fan. Nay, madness hath beguiled you and many mo;
For Liberty is gone and also Felicity.

Magn. Gone? alas, ye have undone me!

Fan. Nay, he that sent us, Cloaked Collusion,
And your painted Pleasure, Courtly Abusion,
And your demeanour with Counterfeit Countenance,
And your surveyor,<169> Crafty Conveyance,
Ere ever we were aware brought us in adversity,
And hath robbed you quite from all felicity.                 1890

Magn. Why, is this the largesse that I have used?

Fan. Nay, it was your fondness that ye have used.

Magn. And is this the credence that I gave to the letter?

Fan. Why, could not your wit serve you no better?

Magn. Why, who would have thought in you such guile?

Fan. What? yes, by the rood, sir, it was I all this while
That you trusted, and Fancy is my name;
And Folly, my brother, that made you much game.

Here cometh in ADVERSITY

Magn. Alas, who is yonder, that grimly looks?

Fan. Adieu, for I will not come in his clokes. [Here FANCY goes
out]                                                         1900

Magn. Lord, so my flesh trembleth now for dread!

Here MAGNIFICENCE is beaten down, and spoiled from all his goods
and raiment.

Adver. I am Adversity, that for thy misdeed
From God am sent to quite thee thy meed.
Vile velyard, thou must now my dint withstand,
Thou must abide the dint of my hand:
Lie there, losel, for all thy pomp and pride;
Thy pleasure now with pain and trouble shall be tried.
The stroke of God, Adversity I hight;
I pluck down king, prince, lord, and knight,
I rush at them roughly, and make them lie full low,          1910
And in their most trust I make them overthrow.
This losel was a lord, and lived at his lust,
And now, like a lurdan, he lieth in the dust:
He knew not himself, his heart was so high;
Now is there no man that will set by him a fly:
He was wont to boast, brag, and to brace;
Now dare he not for shame look one in the face:
All wordly wealth for him too little was;
Now hath he right nought, naked as an ass:
Sometime without measure he trusted in gold,                 1920
And now without measure he shall have hunger and cold.
Lo, sirs, thus I handle them all
That follow their fancies in folly to fall:
Man or woman, of what estate they be,
I counsel them beware of Adversity.
Of sorrowful servants I have many scores:
I visit them sometimes with blains and with sores;
With botches and carbuncles in care I them knit;
With the gout I make them to groan where they sit;
Some I make lepers and lazars full hoarse;                   1930
And from that they love best some I divorce;
Some with the marmoll to halt I them make;<170>
And some to cry out of the bone-ache;
And some I visit with burning of fire;
Of some I wring of the neck like a wire;
And some I make in a rope to totter and walter;
And some for to hang themself in a halter;
And some I visit to battle, war, and murder,<171>
And make each man to slay other;
To drown or to slay themself with a knife;                   1940
And all is for their ungracious life.
Yet sometime I strike where is none offence,
Because I would prove men of their patience.
But, nowadays, to strike I have great cause,
Lidderons so little set by God's laws.
Fathers and mothers, that be negligent,
And suffer their children to have their intent,
To guide them virtuously that will not remember,
Them or their children oft times I dismember;
Their children because that they have no meekness;           1950
I visit their fathers and mothers with sickness;
And if I see thereby they will not amend,
Then mischief suddenly I them send;
For there is nothing that more displeaseth God
Than from their children to spare the rod
Of correction, but let them have their will;
Some I make lame, and some I do kill;
And some I strike with a frenzy;
Of some of their children I strike out the eye;
And where the father by wisdom worship hath won,             1960
I send oft times a fool to his son.
Wherefore of Adversity look ye beware,
For when I come cometh sorrow and care:
For I strike lords of realms and lands,
That rule not by measure that they have in their hands,
That sadly rule not their household men;
I am God's prepositor, I print them with a pen;
Because of their negligence and their wanton vagues,
I visit them and strike them with many sore plagues.
To take, sirs, example of that I you tell,                   1970
And beware of Adversity by my counsel,
Take heed of this caitiff that lieth here on ground;
Behold, how Fortune of him hath frowned!<172>
For though we show you this in game and play,
Yet it proveth earnest, ye may see, every day.
For now will I from this caitiff go,
And take mischief and vengeance of other mo,
That hath deserved it as well as he.
Ho, where art thou? come hither, Poverty,
Take this caitiff to thy lore.                               1980

Here cometh in POVERTY [and ADVERSITY goes out]

Pover. Ah, my bones ache, my limbs be sore;
Alas, I have the sciatica full evil in my hip!
Alas, where is youth that was wont for to skip?
I am lousy, and unliking,<173> and full of scurf,
My colour is tawny, coloured as turf:
I am Poverty, that all men doth hate,
I am baited with dogs at every man's gate:
I am ragged and rent, as ye may see;
Full few but they have envy at me.
Now must I this carcass lift up:                             1990
He dined with delight, with Poverty he must sup.
Rise up, sir, and welcome unto me.

Hic accedat ad levandum MAGNIFICENCE et locabit eum super locum
stratum
("Here he lifts up MAGNIFICENCE, and puts a coverlet over him" PH)

Magn. Alas, where is now my gold and fee?
Alas, I say, whereto am I brought?
Alas, alas, alas, I die for thought!

Pover. Sir, all this would have been thought on before:
He wotteth not what wealth is that never was sore.

Magn. Fie, fie, that ever I should be brought in this snare!
I weened once never to have known care.

Pover. Lo, such is this world! I find it writ,               2000
In wealth to beware, and that is wit.

Magn. In wealth to beware, if I had had grace,
Never had I been brought in this case.

Pover. Now, sith it will no other be,
All that God sendeth, take it in gree;
For, though you were sometime of noble estate,
Now must you learn to beg at every man's gate.

Magn. Alas, that ever I should be so shamed!
Alas, that ever I Magnificence was named!                    2010
Alas, that ever I was so hard happed,
In misery and wretchedness thus to be lapped!
Alas, that I could not myself no better guide!
Alas, in my cradle that I had not died!

Pover. Yea, sir, yea, leave all this rage,
And pray to God your sorrows to assuage:
It is folly to grudge against his visitation.
With heart contrite make your supplication
Unto your Maker, that made both you and me,
And, when it pleaseth God, better may be.

Magn. Alas, I wot not what I should pray!                    2020

Pover. Remember you better, sir, beware what ye say,
For dread ye displease the high Deity.
Put your will in his will, for surely it is he
That may restore you again to felicity,
And bring you again out of adversity.
Therefore poverty look patiently ye take,
And remember he suffered much more for your sake,
Howbeit of all sin he was innocent,
And ye have deserved this punishment.

Magn. Alas, with cold my limbs shall be marred!              2030

Pover. Yea, sir, now must ye learn to lie hard,
That was wont to lie on feather-beds of down;
Now must your feet lie higher than your crown.
Where you were wont to have caudles for your head,
Now must you munch mammocks and lumps of bread;
And where you had changes of rich array,
Now lap you in a coverlet full fain that ye may;
And where that ye were pomped with what ye would,
Now must ye suffer both hunger and cold:
With courtly silks ye were wont to be draw;                  2040
Now must ye learn to lie on the straw;
Your skin that was wrapped in shirts of Rennes,
Now must ye be storm-beaten with showers and rains;
Your head that was wont to be happed most droopy and drowsy,
Now shall ye be scabbed, scurvy, and lousy.

Magn. Fie on this world, full of treachery,
That ever nobleness should lie thus wretchedly!

Pover. Sir, remember the turn of Fortune's wheel,
That wantonly can wink, and winch with her heel.
Now she will laugh, forthwith she will frown;                2050
Suddenly set up, and suddenly plucked down.
She danceth variance with mutability;
Now all in wealth, forthwith in poverty;
In her promise there is no sickerness;
All her delight is set in doubleness.

Magn. Alas, of Fortune I may well complain!

Pover. Yea, sir, yesterday will not be called again:
But yet, sir, now in this case,
Take it meekly, and thank God of his grace;
For now go I will beg for you some meat;                     2060
It is folly against God for to plete;
I will walk now with my beggar's bags,
And wrap you the whiles with these homely rags.

Discendo dicat ista verba:
("Going away, he says these words")

Ah, how my limbs be lither and lame!
Better it is to beg than to be hanged with shame;
Yet many had liefer hanged be,
Than for to beg their meat for charity:
They think it no shame to rob and steal,
Yet were they better to beg a great deal;
For by robbing they run in manus tuas quick <174>            2070
But begging is better medicine for the neck;
Yea, Mary, is it, yea, so mote I go:
Ah, Lord God, how the gout wringeth me by the toe!

Here MAGNIFICENCE dolorously maketh his moan.

Magn. O feeble fortune, O doleful destiny!
O hateful hap, O careful cruelty!
O sighing sorrow, O thoughtful misery!
O redeless ruth, O painful poverty!
O dolorous heart, O hard adversity!
O odious distress, O deadly pain and woe!
For worldy shame I wax both wan and blo.                     2080
Where is now my wealth and my noble estate?
Where is now my treasure, my lands, and my rent?
Where is now all my servants that I had here of late?
Where is now my gold upon them that I spent?
Where is now all my rich habiliment?
Where is now my kin, my friends, and my noble blood?
Where is now all my pleasure and my wordly good?
Alas, my folly! alas, my wanton will!
I may no more speak, till I have wept my fill.

Here cometh in LIBERTY.

Lib. With, yea Mary, sirs, thus should it be:                2090
I kissed her sweet, and she kissed me;
I danced the darling on my knee;
I garred her gasp, I garred her glee,
With Dance on the lea, the lea!<175>
I bussed that baby with heart so free;
She is the boot of all my bale.<176>
Ah so! that sigh was far-fet!
To love that lovesome I will not let;
My heart is wholly on her set:
I plucked her by the patlet;                                 2100
At my devise I with her met;
My fancy fairly on her I set;
So merrily singeth the nightingale!
In lust and liking my name is Liberty:
I am desired with highest and lowest degree;
I live as me list, I leap out at large;
Of earthly thing I have no care nor charge;
I am president of princes, I prick them with pride.<177>
What is he living that Liberty would lack?
A thousand pound with Liberty may hold no tack;              2110
At liberty a man may be bold for to break;
Wealth without liberty goeth all to wrack.
But yet, sirs, hardly one thing learn of me:
I warn you beware of too much liberty,
For totum in toto <178> is not worth an haw;<179>
Too hardy, or too much, too free of the daw;<180>
Too sober, too sad, too subtle, too wise;
Too merry, too mad, too giggling, too nice;
Too full of fancies, too lordly, too proud;
Too homely, too holy, too lewd, and too loud;                2120
Too flattering, too smattering, too too out of harre;
Too clattering, too chattering, too short, and too far;
Too jetting, too jagging, and too full of japes;
Too mocking, too mowing, too like a jackanapes:
Thus totum in toto<178> groweth up, as ye may see,
By means of madness, and too much liberty;
For I am a virtue, if I be well used,
And I am a vice where I am abused.

Magn. Ah, woe worth thee, Liberty, now thou sayst full true!
That I used thee too much, sore may I rue.                   2130

Lib. What, a very vengeance, I say, who is that?
What brothel,<181> I say, is yonder bound in a mat?

Magn. I am Magnificence, that sometime thy master was.

Lib. What, is the world thus come to pass?
Cock's arms, sirs, will ye not see
How he is undone by the means of me?
For if Measure had ruled Liberty as he began,
This lurdan that here lieth had been a nobleman.
But he abused so his free liberty,
That now he hath lost all his felicity,                      2140
Not through largesse of liberal expense,
But by the way of fancy insolence;
For liberality is most convenient
A prince to use with all his whole intent,
Largely rewarding them that have deserved,
And so shall a nobleman nobly be served:
But nowadays as hucksters they huck and they stick,
And pinch at the payment of a pudding-prick;
A laudable largesse, I tell you, for a lord,
To prate for the patching of a potsherd!                     2150
Spare for the spence of a noble, that his honour might save,
And spend c. s.<182> for the pleasure of a knave!
But so long they reckon with their reasons amiss,
That they lose their liberty and all that there is.

Magn. Alas, that ever I occupied<183> such abusion!

Lib. Yea, for now it hath brought thee to confusion:
For, where I am occupied and used wilfully,
It cannot continue long prosperously;
As evidently in reckless youth you may see,
How many come to mischief for too much liberty;              2160
And some in the world their brain is so idle,
That they set their children to run on the bridle,
In youth to be wanton and let them have their will;
An they never thrive in their age, it shall not greatly skill:
Some fall to folly themself for to spill,
And some fall preaching at the Tower Hill;<184> 
Some hath so much liberty of one thing and other
That neither they set by father nor mother;
Some have so much liberty that they fear no sin,
Till, as ye see many times, they shame all their kin.        2170
I am so lusty to look on, so fresh, and so free,
That nuns will leave their holiness, and run after me;
Friars with folly I make them so fain,
They cast up their obedience to catch me again,
At liberty to wander and walk over all,
That lustily they leap sometime their cloister wall.

Hic aliquis buccat in cornu a retro post populum.
("Here someone blows a horn behind the audience" PH)

Yonder is a whoreson for me doth recheat:
Adieu, sirs, for I think lest that I come too late.	[Here
LIBERTY goes out]

Magn. O good Lord, how long shall I endure
This misery, this careful wretchedness?                      2180
Of worldly wealth, alas, who can be sure?
In Fortune's friendship there is no steadfastness:
She hath deceived me with her doubleness.
For to be wise all men may learn of me,
In wealth to beware of hard adversity.

Here cometh in CRAFTY CONVEYANCE and CLOAKED COLLUSION, with a
lusty laughter.

Cr. Con. Ha, ha, ha! for laughter I am like to brast.

Cl. Col. Ha, ha, ha! for sport I am like to spew and cast.<185>

Cr. Con. What hath thou gotted, in faith, to thy share?

Cl. Col. In faith, of his coffers the bottoms are bare.

Cr. Con. As for his plate of silver, and such trash,         2190
I warrant you, I have given it a lash.

Cl. Col. What, then he may drink out of a stone cruse?

Cr. Con. With, yea, sir, by Jesu that slain was with Jews!
He may rinse a pitcher, for his plate is to wed.

Cl. Col. In faith, and he may dream on a dagswain<186> for any
feather-bed.

Cr. Con. By my troth, we have rifled him meetly well!<187>

Cl. Col. Yea, but thank me thereof every deal.

Cr. Con. Thank thee thereof, in the devil's date!<188>

Cl. Col. Leave thy prating, or else I shall lay thee on thy pate.

Cr. Con. Nay, to wrangle, I warrant thee, it is but a stone-cast.
                                                             2200

Cl. Col. By the mass, I shall cleave thy head to the waist.

Cr. Con. Yea, wilt thou cleanly cleave me in the cleft with thy
nose?

Cl. Col. I shall thrust in thee my dagger-

Cr. Con. Through the leg into the hose.

Cl. Col. Nay, whoreson, here is my glove; take it up, an thou
dare.

Cr. Con. Turd, thou art good to be a man of war.

Cl. Col. I shall skelp thee on the scalp; lo, seest thou that?

Cr. Con. What, wilt thou skelp me? thou dare not look on a gnat.

Cl. Col. By Cock's bones, I shall bless thee, an thou be too bold.

Cr. Con. Nay, then thou wilt ding the devil,<189> an thou be not
hold.                                                        2210

Cl. Col. But wottest thou, whoreson? I rede thee to be wise.

Cr. Con. Now I rede thee beware, I have warned thee twice.

Cl. Col. Why, weenest thou that I forbear thee for thine own sake?

Cr. Con. Peace, or I shall wring thy be in a brake.<190>

Cl. Col. Hold thy hand, daw, off thy dagger, and stint of thy din,
Or I shall falchion thy flesh, and scrape thee on the skin.

Cr. Con. Yea, wilt thou, hangman? I say, thou cavell!<191>

Cl. Col. Nay, thou rude ravener, rain-beaten javel!<192>

Cr. Con. What, thou Colyn Coward, known and tried!

Cl. Col. Nay, thou false-hearted dastard, thou dare not abide!
                                                             2220

Cr. Con. An if there were none to displease but thou and I,
Thou should not scape, whoreson, but thou should die.

Cl. Col. Nay, I shall wring thee, whoreson, on the wrist.

Cr. Con. Mary, I defy thy best and thy worst.

Here cometh in COUNTERFEIT COUNTENANCE.<193>

C. Count. What, a very vengeance, need all these words?
Go together by the heads, and give me your swords.

Cl. Col. So he is the worst brawler that ever was born.

Cr. Con. In faith, so to suffer thee, it is but a scorn.

C. Count. Now let us be all one, and let us live in rest,
For we be, sirs, but a few of the best.                      2230

Cl. Col. By the mass, man, thou shalt find me reasonable.

Cr. Con. In faith, and I will be to reason agreeable.

C. Count. Then I trust to God and the holy rood,
Here shall be no great shedding of blood.

Cl. Col. By our lakin, sir, not by my will.

Cr. Con. By the faith that I owe to God, and I will sit still.

C. Count. Well said: But, in faith, what was your quarrel?

Cl. Col. Mary, sir, this gentleman called me a javel.

Cr. Con. Nay, by Saint Mary, it was ye called me knave.

Cl. Col. Mary, so ungodly language you me gave.              2240

C. Count. Ah, shall we have more of these matters yet? 
Methink ye are not greatly encumbered with wit.

Cr. Con. God's foot, I warrant you I am a gentleman born,
And thus, to be faced I think it great scorn.

C. Count. I cannot well tell of your dispositions;
An ye be a gentleman, ye have knavish conditions.

Cl. Col. By God, I tell you I will not be out-faced!

Cr. Con. By the mass, I warrant thee, I will not be braced.

C. Count. Tush, tush, it is a great default:
The one of you is too proud, the other is too haut.          2250
Tell me briefly whereupon ye began.

Cl. Col. Mary, sir, he said that he was the prettier man
Than I was, in opening of locks;
And, I tell you, I disdain much of his mocks.

Cr. Con. Thou saw never yet but I did my part,
The lock of a casket to make to start.

C. Count. Nay, I know well enough ye are both well-handed
To grope a gardeviance<194>, though it be well banded.

Cl. Col. I am the better yet in a budget.

Cr. Con. And I the better in a male.                         2260

C. Count. Tush, these matters that ye move are but sops in ale:
Your trimming and tramming by me must be tanged,<195>
For, had I not been, ye both had been hanged,
When we with Magnificence goods made chevisaunce.<196>

Magn. And therefore our Lord send you a very vengeance!

C. Count. What beggar art thou that thus doth ban and warray?<197>

Magn. Ye be the thieves, I say, away my goods did carry.

Cl. Col. Cock's bones, thou beggar, what is thy name?

Magn. Magnificence I was, whom ye have brought to shame.

C. Count. Yea, but trow you, sirs, that this is he?          2270

Cr. Con. Go we near, and let us see.

Cl. Col. By Cock's bones, it is the same.

Magn. Alas, alas, sirs, ye are to blame!
I was your master, though ye think it scorn,
And now on me ye gaure<198> and spurn.

C. Count. Lie still, lie still now, with ill-hail!

Cr. Con. Yea, for thy language, cannot thee avail.

Cl. Col. Abide, sir, abide, I shall make him to piss.

Magn. Now give me somewhat, for God's sake I crave!

Cr. Con. In faith, I give thee four quarters of a knave.     2280

C. Count. In faith, and I bequeath him the tooth-ache.

Cl. Col. And I bequeath him the bone-ache.

Cr. Con. And I bequeath him the gout and the gin.

Cl. Col. And I bequeath him sorrow for his sin.

C. Count. And I give him Christ's curse,
With never a penny in his purse.

Cr. Con. And I give him the cough, the murr, and the pose.

Cl. Col. Yea, for requiem aeternam groweth forth of his nose<199>.
But now let us make merry and good cheer!

C. Count. And to the tavern let us draw near.                2290

Cr. Con. And from thence to the half street,<200>
To get us there some fresh meat.

Cl. Col. Why, is there any store of raw mutton<201>

C. Count. Yea, in faith, or else thou art too great a glutton.

Cr. Con. But they say it is a queasy meat;<202>
It will strike a man mischievously in a heat.

Cl. Col. In fay, man, some ribs of the mutton be so rank,
That they will fire one ungraciously in the flank.

C. Count. Yea, and when ye come out of the shop,
Ye shall be clapped with a collop,                           2300
That will make you to halt and to hop.

Cr. Con. Some be rested there that they think on it forty days,
For there be whores there at all assays.

Cl. Col. For the passion of God, let us go thither!<203>

Et cum festinatione descendant a loco.
("And they go hurriedly out of the place " PH)

Magn. Alas, mine own servants to show me such reproach,
Thus to rebuke me, and have me in despite!
So shamefully to me, their master, to approach,
That sometime was a noble prince of might!
Alas, to live longer I have no delight!
For to live in misery it is harder than death:               2310
I am weary of the world, for unkindness me slayeth.

Hic Intrat DESPAIR
("Enter DESPAIR")

Des. Despair is my name, that Adversity doth follow:
In time of distress I am ready at hand;
I make heavy hearts with eyen full hollow;
Of fervent charity I quench out the brand;
Faith and Goodhope I make aside to stand;
In God's mercy, I tell them, is but folly to trust;
All grace and pity I lay in the dust.
What, liest thou there lingering, lewdly and loathsome?
It is too late now thy sins to repent;                       2320
Thou hast been so wayward, so wrangling, and so wrathsome,
And so far thou art behind of thy rent,
And so ungraciously thy days thou hast spent,
That thou art not worthy to look God in the face.

Magn. Nay, nay, man, I look never to have part of his grace;
For I have so ungraciously my life misused,
Though I ask mercy, I must needs be refused.

Des. No, no, for thy sins be so exceeding far,
So innumerable and so full of despite,
And against thy Maker thou hast made such war,               2330
That thou canst not have never mercy in his sight.

Magn. Alas, my wickedness, that may I wite!
But now I see well there is no better rede,
But sigh and sorrow, and wish myself dead.

Des. Yea, rid thyself, rather than this life for to lead;
The world waxeth weary of thee, thou livest too long.

Hic Intrat MISCHIEF
("Enter MISCHIEF")

Mis. And I, Mischief, am come at need,
Out of thy life thee for to lead:
And look that it be not long
Ere that thyself thou go hang                                2340
With this halter good and strong;
Or else with this knife cut out a tongue
Of thy throat-boll<204>, and rid thee out of pain:
Thou art not the first himself hath slain.
Lo, here is thy knife and a halter! and, ere we go further,
Spare not thyself, but boldly thee murther.

Des. Yea, have done at once without delay.

Magn. Shall I myself hang with an halter? nay;
Nay, rather will I chose to rid me of this life
In sticking myself with this faire knife.                    2350

Here MAGNIFICENCE would slay himself with a knife.

Mis. Alarum, alarum! too long we abide! <205>

Des. Out, harrow<206>, hell burneth! where shall I me hide?

Hic intrat GOODHOPE fugientibus DESPAIR et MISCHIEF: repente
GOODHOPE surripiat illi gladium, et dicat: 
("Enter GOODHOPE, driving away DESPAIR and MISCHIEF: quickly
GOODHOPE snatches away the knife, and says:" PH)

Good. Alas, dear son, sore cumbered is thy mind,
Thyself that thou would slay against nature and kind!

Magn. Ah, blessed may ye be, sir! what shall I you call?

Good. Goodhope, sir, my name is; remedy principal
Against all sautes of your ghostly foe:
Who knoweth me, himself may never slo.

Magn. Alas, sir, so I am lapped in adversity,
That Despair well-nigh had mischieved me!                    2360
For, had ye not the sooner been my refuge,
Of damnation I had been drawn in the luge.

Good. Undoubted ye had lost yourself eternally:
There is no man may sin more mortally
Than of wanhope through the unhappy ways,
By mischief to breviate and shorten his days:
But, my good son, learn from Despair to flee,
Wind you from wanhope, and acquaint you with me.
A great misadventure, thy Maker to displease,
Thyself mischieving to thine endless disease!                2370
There was never so hard a storm of misery
But through Goodhope there may come remedy.

Magn. Your words be more sweeter than any precious nard,
They mollify so easily my heart that was so hard;
There is no balm, ne gum of Araby.
More delectable than your language to me.

Good. Sir, your physician is the grace of God,
That you hath punished with his sharp rod.
Goodhope, your pothecary assigned am I.
That God's grace hath vexed you sharply,                     2380
And pained you with a purgation of odious poverty,
Mixed with bitter aloes of hard adversity;
Now must I make you an electuary soft,
I to minister it, you to receive it oft,
With rhubarb of repentance in you for to rest;
With drams of devotion your diet must be drest;
With gums ghostly of glad heart and mind,
To thank God of his sond, and comfort ye shall find.
Put from you presumption and admit humility,
And heartily thank God of your adversity;                    2390
And love that Lord that for your love was dead,
Wounded from the foot to the crown of the head.
For who loveth God can ail nothing but good;
He may help you, He may mend your mood.
Prosperity toHim<207> is given solaciously to man,
Adversity by Him therewith now and then;
Health of body his business to achieve,
Disease and sickness his conscience to discrive,
Affliction and trouble to prove his patience,
Contradiction to prove his sapience,                         2400
Grace of assistance his measure to declare,
Sometime to fall, another time to beware:
And now ye have had, sir, a wondrous fall,
To learn you hereafter for to beware withal.
How say you, sir? can ye these words grope?

Magn. Yea, sir, now am I armed with Goodhope,
And sore I repent me of my wilfulness;
I ask God mercy of my negligence<208>
Under Goodhope enduring ever still,
Me humbly committing unto God's will.                        2410

Good. Then shall you be soon delivered from distress,
For now I see coming to youward Redress.

Hic Intrat REDRESS
("Enter REDRESS")

Red. Christ be among you, and the Holy Ghost!

Good. He be your conduct, the Lord of mights most!

Red. Sir, is your patient anything amended?

Good. Yea, sir, he is sorry for that he hath offended.

Red. How feel you yourself, my friend? how is your mind?

Magn. A wretched man, sir, to my Maker unkind.

Red. Yea, but have ye repented with heart contrite?

Magn. Sir, the repentance I have no man can write.           2420

Red. And have ye banished from you all despair?

Magn. Yea, wholly to Goodhope I have made my repair.

Good. Questionless he doth me assure
In goodhope alway for to endure.

Red. Then stand up, sir, in God's name!
And I trust to ratify and amend your fame.
Goodhope, I pray you with hearty affection
To send over to me Sad Circumspection.

Good. Sir, your request shall not be delayed.

Et Exeat
("And he goes out")

Red. Now surely, Magnificence, I am right well apayed        2430
Of that I see you now in the state of grace;
Now shall ye be renewed with solace:
Take now upon you this habiliment,
And to that I say give good advertisement.

MAGNIFICENCE accipiat indumentum
("MAGNIFICENCE takes the garment.")

Magn. To your request I shall be comformable.

Red. First, I say, with mind firm and stable <209>
Determine to amend all your wanton excess,
And be ruled by me, which am called Redress:
Redress my name is, that little am I used
As the world requireth, but rather I am refused:             2440
Redress should be at the reckoning in every account, 
And specially to redress that were out of joint:
Full many things there be that lacketh redress,
The which were too long now to express;
But redress is redeless, and may do no correction.
Now welcome, forsooth, Sad Circumspection.

Here cometh in SAD CIRCUMSPECTION, saying

Sad Cir. Sir, after your message I hied me hither straight,
For to understand your pleasure and also your mind.

Red. Sir, to account you the continue of my conceit,<210>
Is from adversity Magnificence to unbind.                    2450

Sad Cir. How fortuned you, Magnificence, so far to fall behind?

Magn. Sir, the long absence of you, Sad Circumspection,
Caused me of Adversity to fall in subjection.

Red. All that he saith, of truth doth proceed;
For where Sad Circumspection is long out of the way,
Of Adversity it is to stand in dread.

Sad Cir. Without fail, sir, that is no nay<211>;
Circumspection inhateth<212> all running astray.
But, sir, by me to rule first ye began.

Magn. My wilfulness, sir, excuse I ne can.                   2460

Sad Cir. Then of folly in times past you repent?

Magn. Soothly, to repent me I have great cause.
Howbeit, from you I received a letter<213>
Which contained in it a special clause
That I should use largesse.

Sad Cir. Nay, sir, there a pause.

Red. Yet let us see this matter thoroughly engrossed.

Magn. Sir, this letter ye sent to me, at Pontoise was enclosed.

Sad Cir. Who brought you that letter, wote ye what he hight?

Magn. Largesse, sir, by his credence was his name.           2470

Sad Cir. This letter ye speak of, never did I write.

Red. To give so hasty credence ye were much to blame.

Magn. Truth it is, sir; for after he wrought me much shame,
And caused me also to use too much Liberty,
And made also Measure to be put from me.

Red. Then Wealth with you might in no wise abide.

Sad Cir. Ah ha! Fancy and Folly met with you, I trow.

Red. It would be found so, if it were well tried.

Magn. Surely my wealth with them was overthrow.

Sad Cir. Remember you, therefore, how late ye were low.      2480

Red. Yea, and beware of unhappy abusion.

Sad Cir. And keep you from counterfeiting of Cloaked Collusion.

Magn. Sir, in Goodhope I am to amend.

Red. Use not then your countenance for to counterfeit.

Sad Cir. And from crafters and hafters I you forfend.

Hic Intrat PERSEVERANCE
(You know what Hic intrat means by now, surely?)

Magn. Well, sir, after your counsel my mind I will set.

Red. What, brother Perseverance! surely well met.

Sad Cir. Ye come hither as well as can be thought.

Per. I heard say that Adversity with Magnificence had fought.

Magn. Yea, sir, with Adversity I have been vexed.            2490
But Goodhope and Redress hath mended mine estate,
And Sad Circumspection to me they have annexed.

Red. What this man hath said, perceive ye his sentence<214>?

Magn. Yea, sir, from him my courage shall never flit.

Sad Cir. According to truth they be well devised.

Magn. Sirs, I am agreed to abide your ordinance,
Faithful assurance with good peradvertance.

Per. If you be so minded, we be right glad.

Red. And ye shall have more worship than ever ye had.

Magn. Well, I perceive in you there is much sadness,         2500
Gravity of counsel, providence, and wit;
Your comfortable advice and wit exceedeth all gladness.
But friendly I will refrain you further, ere we flit,<215>
Whereto were most meetly my courage to knit:
Your minds I beseech you herein to express,
Commencing this process at Master Redress.

Red. Sith unto me foremost this process is erected,
Herein I will aforce me to show you my mind.
First, from your magnificence, sin must be abjected,
In all works more grace shall ye find;                       2510
Be gentle then of courage and learn to be kind,
For of nobleness the chief point is to be liberal.
So that your largesse be not too prodigal.

Sad Cir. Liberty to a lord belongeth of right,
But wilful waywardness must walk out of the way;
Measure of your lusts must have the oversight,
And not all the niggard nor the chincherd to play;
Let never niggardship your nobleness affray;
In your rewards use such moderation
That nothing be given without consideration.                 2520

Per. To the increase of your honour then arm you with right,
And fumously address you with magnanimity;
And ever let the dread of God be in your sight;
And know yourself mortal, for all your dignity;
Set not all your affiance in Fortune full of guile;
Remember this life lasteth but a while.

Magn. Redress, in my remembrance your lesson shall rest,
And Sad Circumspection I mark in my mind:
But, Perseverance, meseemeth your problem was best;
I shall it never forget, nor leave it behind,                2530
But wholly to Perseverance myself I will bind,
Of that I have misdone to make a redress,
And with Sad Circumspection correct my wantonness.

Red. Unto this process briefly compiled,<216>
Comprehending the world casual and transitory,
Who list to consider shall never be beguiled,
If it be registered well in memory;
A plain example of worldly vain-glory,
How in this world there is no sickerness,
But fallible flattery enmixed with bitterness;               2540
Now well, now woe, now high, now low degree,
Now rich, now poor, now whole, now in disease,
Now pleasure at large, now in captivity,
Now lief, now loath, now please, now displease,
Now ebb, now flow, now increase, now decrease;
So in this world there is no sickerness,
But fallible flattery enmixed with bitterness;

Sad Cir. A mirror encircled is this interlude,
This life inconstant for to behold and see;
Suddenly advanced, and suddenly subdued,                     2550
Suddenly riches, and suddenly poverty,
Suddenly comfort, and suddenly adversity;
Suddenly thus Fortune can both smile and frown,
Suddenly set up, and suddenly cast down;
Suddenly promoted, and suddenly put back,
Suddenly cherished, and suddenly cast aside,
Suddenly commended, and suddenly find a lack,
Suddenly granted, and suddenly denied,
Suddenly hid, and suddenly espied;
Suddenly thus Fortune can both smile and frown,              2560
Suddenly set up, and suddenly cast down.

Per. This treatise, devised to make you disport,
Showeth nowadays how the world cumbered is,
To the pith of the matter who list to resort;
To-day it is well, to-morrow it is all amiss,
To-day in delight, to-morrow bare of bliss,
To-day a lord, to-morrow lie in the dust;
Thus in the world there is no earthly trust;
To-day fair weather, to-morrow a stormy rage,
To-day hot, to-morrow outrageous cold,                       2570
To-day a yeoman, to-morrow made a page,
To-day in surety, to-morrow bought and sold,
To-day masterfast, to-morrow he hath no hold,
To-day a man, to-morrow he lieth in the dust;
Thus in this world there is no earthly trust.

Magn. This matter we have moved, you mirthful to make,
Pressly purposed<217> under pretence of play,
Showeth wisdom to them that wisdom can take,
How suddenly worldly wealth doth decay,
How wisdom through wantonness vanisheth away,                2580
How none estate living of himself can be sure,
For the wealth of this world cannot endure;
Of the terrestre rechery<218> we fall in the flood,
Beaten with storms of many a froward blast,
Ensorded<219> with the waves savage and wood,
Without our ship be sure, it is likely to brast,
Yet of magnificence oft made is the mast;
Thus none estate living of him can be sure,
For the wealth of this world cannot endure.

Red. Now seemeth us sitting that ye then resort              2590
Home to your palace with joy and royalty.

Sad Cir. Where everything is ordained after your noble port.

Per. There to endure with all felicity.

Magn. I am content, my friends, that it so be.

Red. And ye that have heard this disport and game,
Jesus preserve you from endless woe and shame!

Amen



NOTES TO MAGNIFICENCE.

1. That this piece was composed subsequently to the year 1515
seems evident from the mention made in one place [v. 283] of "King
Lewis of France," as an example of liberality [and as dead]; and
this could only mean Louis XII who died in that year, as his
immediate predecessor of that name [who died in 1483] was the most
niggardly of wretches." MS. note by Ritson in a transcript of'
Magnificence.

2. probate] In our author's Garland of Laurel mention is made of

"Macrobius that did trete
Of Scipions dream what was the true probate."
v. 367

where probate is proof, meaning, or, perhaps, interpretation: but
in what sense Skelton uses the word here I cannot determine [Qy.
trial, touchstone ?], the greater part of this speech being beyond
my comprehension.

3. The amends thereof is far to call again] i.e. apparently, the
amends, cure, is far to seek.

4. made to the lure] See note 12 to Ware the Hawk

5. Mary] i.e. By the Virgin Mary.

6. Ye, to knacking earnest what an it preve] i.e. Yea, what if it
prove mocking earnest: compare the preceding line, and see
Jamieson's Et. Dict. of Scott. Lang. in v. Knack.

7. in the mew] i.e. in confinement,-properly, the place in which
hawks were kept, or in which fowls were fattened.

8. a cue] i.e. half a farthing. "Cu, half a farthing, or q.,
Calcus." Prompt. Parvul. ed. Way. p. 106. Q. should seem to stand
for quadrans, a farthing; but Minshow, who finished his first
edition in Oxford, says it was only half that sum, and thus
particularly explains it: "Because they set down in the battling
or buttery books in Oxford and Cam bridge, the letter q. for half
a farthing, and in Oxford, when they make that cue or q. a
farthing, they say, cap my q., and make it a farthing thus a/q"
Nares's Glossary.

It seems possible that cue or q. may have been an abreviation of
"calcus, quarta pars oboli." Way's note in v.

9. Somewhat I could infer
Your conceit to debar] i.e. I could bring in somewhat to hinder,
contravene, your conception of the subject. So again in our
author's Garland of Laurel;

"Madame, your apposal is well inferred,
And at your advantage quickly it is
Touched, and hard for to be debarred."
v. 141.

10. the surplus of my saw] i.e. the remainder of my saying.

11. wonder] I may observe that the Roxburgh reprint, without
authority, and against the sense, has "no wonder."

12. To you I arret it, and cast
Thereof the reformation] So Skelton again;

"Sith unto me foremost this process is aretted." 
v. 2507 of the present drama.

"Arreting unto your wise examination
How all that I do is under reformation."
Garland of Laurel, v. 410.

He has also,

"Arreting my sight toward the zodiac." Id. v. 1.

"My supplication to you I arret." Id. v. 55.

Arret in our early writers frequently signifies-impute, a meaning
foreign to the present passages: in the two last cited, there can
be no doubt that it is used in the sense of-raise: in the others
it seems to mean-offer, refer.

13. Come off, therefore, let see] Compare Chaucer;

-- let see, come off, and say."
Court of Love-Works, fol. 331. ed. 1602.

and Reynard the Fox; "Why tarry ye thus long, come off." Sig. b 7.
ed. 1481: and Morte d'Arthur; "Come off then said they all, and do
hit." Book xx. cap. iiii. vol. ii. 394. ed. Southey.

14. reason and skill] An expression which Skelton has elsewhere;
but the words are nearly synonymous. "Skill. Racio." Prompt. Parv.
ed. 1499.

15. Horatius to record] i.e. Horace to witness. See Odes, Bk II,
X.

16. Measure is treasure] Lydgate mentions this as "an old proverb:
"see his verses on Moderation, MS. Harl. 2251. fol. 29, and his
poem beginning "Men writ of old how measure is treasure." Id.
2255. fol. 143.

17. All trebles and tenors be ruled by a mean] "Intercentus, a
mean of a song." Ortus Vocab. fol. ed. W. de Worde, n. d. In the
notes on Shakespeare, in Todd's Johnson's Dict. &c., mean is
wrongly explained-tenor: what the mean was, depended entirely on
the nature of the composition.

18. it is no mastery] i.e. what you say requires no masterly
skill.

"So me help God! quoth Bevis tho,
It were no mastery me to slo,
For this is the fourth day agone
Meat ne drink ne bit I none."
Sir Bevis of Hampton, p. 68. Maid. ed.

"That is little mastery said Sir Launcelot, to slay mine horse."
Morte d' Arthur, B. xix. c. iiii. vol. ii. 369. ed. Southey.

19. sitting] i.e. proper, becoming,-a word very common in our
early poetry (altered unnecessarily to "fitting" in the Roxburgh
reprint of this piece).

20. Had I wist!] i.e. of a mistake which you may have cause to
repent. See note 7 to The Death of King Edward IV.

21. a popping fool] "He is a popped fool or a stark fool for the
nonce. Homo fatuitate monstrabilis." Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. P
iii. ed. 1530. And see note 15 to A Replication, &c.

22. Here is none forceth whether you float or sink] So Chaucer;

"Him recketh never whether she float or sink." 
Annel. and Ar.,-Works, fol. 244. ed. 1602.

23. benedicite] "Bless you"

24. King Lewis] i.e. King Louis the Twelfth: see note 1.

25. Jack shall have Jill] So Heywood;

"Come chat at home, all is well, Jack shall have Jill." 
Dialogue, sig. F 3.-Works, ed. 1598.

26. Doncaster cuts] i.e. Doncaster horses.-Cut was a term for a
common horse, from its having the tail cut short.

27. Go, shake the dog, hey] See note 10 to Verses Against Dundas

28. your noble estate] Equivalent to-your noble lordship.

29. Pountesse]i.e Pointoise, near Paris

30. Magn. By your sooth?] Ed. prefixes "Fancy" to these words, and
omits the prefix to the next speech.

31. They bare me in hand that I was a spy] i.e. They accused me,
laid to my charge, that, &c.

"This false knight, that hath this treason wrought,
Bereth her in hand that she hath done this thing."
Chaucer's Man of Law's Tale, v. 5039. ed. Tyr.

"What crime or evil mayest thou bear me in hand of: Quel crime ou
mal me peulx tu mettre sus." Palsgrave, p. 450. "Many be borne in
hand of a fault, and punished therefor, that were never guilty.
Plerique facinoris insimulantur," &c. Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. m
i.i. ed. 1530. This expression occurs with a different shade of
meaning in our author's Why come ye not to Court,-

"He beareth the king on hand,
That he must pill his land" &c.
v. 449.

32. And would have made me Friar Tuck,
To preach out of the pillory hole] An allusion to the punishment
called collistrigium, a kind of pillory in which the head (or the
head and hands) was confined in holes, so that the prisoner would
bear a ludicrous resemblance to a preacher bending over his
pulpit.

33. antetheme] So in the absurd story of Skelton's preaching,
Merry Tales, Tale vii "I say, as I said before in my antetheme,
vos estis."

34. made largesse as I hight] i.e. made donation of money
according to my name (Fancy's assumed name being Largesse, see v.
272)

35. great estates] i.e. persons of great estate or rank.

36. measure is a merry mean] Heywood in his Epigrams upon Proverbs
has ten on "Measure is a merry mean." Sig. N --Works, ed. 1598.

37. Hic descedat &c.] This stage-direction is not quite correct,
for C. Count. enters as Fancy is going off, and detains him for
the next few lines

38. blundering] i.e. disturbance. "I Blunder, Je perturbe."
Palsgrave, p. 458.

39. to putt the stone] i.e. to throw the stone above hand, from
the uplifted hand, for trial of strength.

40. to fight] Qy. "to flyte"-scold (a word used elsewhere by
Skelton), or "to sight"-see next line but two.

41. at all assays] i.e. in all sorts of trials or enterprises.
Occurs again in v. 2303. "At all assays, En tous poynts, or a tous
poynts." Palsgrave, p. 831. "He is a friend at all assays. Omnium
horarum amicus est." Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. Y ed. 1530.

42. I counterfeit sugar that is but found] This line seems to be
corrupt.

43. fayty bone geyte] Perhaps corrupted French-fait a bon get or
geste. ("Makes a good story").

44. The courtly guise of the new jet] A somewhat pleonastic
expression,-the courtly guise of the new fashion. "Jet, a custom,
guise nouvelle." Palsgrave, p. 224.

"Yet a point of the new jet to tell will I not blyn."
Juditium,-Towneley Mysteries, p 312.

45. Margery Milk Duck] See note 55 to The Tunning of Elynour
Rumming.

46. knuckleboneyard] i, e. a rude clown. Compare Palsgrave's
Acolastus, 1540; "Do I reign here on this fashion, being a
swineherd amongst swine of Boeatia. .i. amongst a meiny of Jack-
hold-my-staves, or knuckleboneyards, being but of late a king,"
&c. Sig. Y iiii.; and Heywood's Dialogue, &c.,-

He is a knuckleboneyard very meet
To match a minion neither fair nor sweet."
Sig. D 4.,-Works, ed. 1598.

47. Sure Surveyance I named me] Ed. gives this line to C. Count.,
and the next speech to Cr.Con. Compare v. 652

48. For, like as mustard is sharp of taste] Qy. A line wanting to
rhyme with this?

49. the iurde hayt.] Words (French perhaps) which I do not
understand

50. Here is a leash of ratches to run a hare] The ratch hunted by
scent and was useless against hares.

51. a captivity] "a" is rather, I suspect, a misprint for, than
used in the sense of "in": compare v. 2543.

52. Sir, the plainness you tell me.] Ed. prefixes Crafty. Con. to
these words, and omits the prefix to the next line.-Qy. for the
rhyme,-"you me tell?" The plainness = the plain fact.

53. By the arms of Calais] The same exclamation occurs in The
Bowge of Court:

"The arms of Calais, I have no coin nor cross!"
v. 398

54. Huffa, huffa] See note 25 to Poems Against Garnesche

55. Rutty bully] "The initial words of some old song." Hawkins'
History of Music, iii. 41. Also occurs in Against a Comely
Custron;

"He lumb'reth on a lewd lute Rutty bully joys."
v. 29.

56. jolly rutterkyn, heyda] Occurs in a song preserved in the
Fairfax MS. which once belonged to Ralph Thoresby, and is now
among the Additional MSS. in the British Museum (5465, fol. 114):

"Hoyda, jolly rutterkin, hoyda,
Like a rutterkin, hoyda!

Rutterkin is come unto our town, 
In a cloak, without coat or gown, 
Save a ragged hood to cover his crown,
Like a rutter, hoyda!

Rutterkin can speak no English,
His tongue runneth all on buttered fish, 
Besmeared with grease about his dish,
Like a rutter, hoyda!

Rutterkin shall bring you all good luck, 
A stoup of beer up at a pluck,
Till his brain be as wise as a duck,
Like a rutter, hoyda!

When rutterkin from board will rise,
He will piss a gallon pot full at twice,
And the overplus under the table, of the new guise,
Like a rutter, hoyda!"

Sir John Hawkins printed the above song (with the music) and tells
us that it "is supposed to be a satire on those drunken Flemings
who came into England with the princess Anne of Cleve, upon her
marriage with king Hen. viii." Hist. of Music, iii. 2. But if it
be the very song quoted in our text, it must allude to
"rutterkins" of a considerably earlier period; and, as the Fairfax
MS. contains two other pieces which are certainly known to be from
Skelton's pen, there is a probability that this also was composed
by him. Court. Ab. in his next speech but one says, "am not I a
jolly rutter?" and (v. 846)

"My robe rusheth
So ruttingly."

Rutter, which properly means-a rider, a trooper (Germ. reiter,
reuter), came to be employed, like its diminutive rutterkin, as a
cant term, and with various significations, (see Hormanni
Vulgaria, sig q iii. ed. 1530; Drant's Horace His Art of Poetry,
pistles, &c. sig. D ii. ed. 1567). When Court. Ab. asks "am not I
a jolly rutter?" he evidently uses the word in the sense of-
dashing fellow, gallant, alluding to his dress, on which he
afterwards enlarges in a soliloquy. In v. 805 Cr. Con. terms him
"this jolly jetter." Compare the following passage of Medwall's
Interlude of Nature, n. d;

"And when he is in such array,
There goeth a rutter, men will say,
a rutter, huff a gallant." Sig. d ii

57. De que pays estes vous?] Fr. "From what country are you?"

58. Et faciat tanquam exiat beretrum cornice] Qy. "exuat (or
rather, exueret) barretrum (i.e. pileum) ironice?"-which would =
"With an ironical air he makes as if to doff his hat."

59. Say vous chanter, Venter tre dawce?.] i.e. Savez vous chanter
(Fr. "Do you know how to sing"), &c.: the last three words of the
line seem to be the beginning of some French song.

60. Wyda] i.e. Oui da! (Fr. "Yes indeed!")

61. stand utter] i.e. stand out, back.

62. a beetle, or a batowe or a buskin laced] In Ortus Vocab. fol.
ed. W. de Worde, n. d., besides "Feritorium. anglice a batting
staff, a battledore or a beetle," we find "Porticulus. anglice a
little hand staff or a beetle." For "batowe" I have proposed
"batone" (baton), a conjecture which is somewhat supported by the
preceding word; but it seems more probable that the right reading
is "botowe," i.e. boot, for the work above cited has "Ocree . . .
anglice boots or botwes [ed. 1514-botowes]," and Prompt. Parv. ed.
1499 gives "Botewe. Coturnus. (A buskin boot)"

63. Jack Hare] See note 51 to Ware the Hawk.

64. By God's foot, &c.] Here the prefixes to the speeches are
surely wrong, but as I am doubtful how they ought to be assigned,
I have not ventured to alter them. Qy.

"Court. Ab. By God's foot, an I dare well fight, for I will not
start.

Cl. Col. Nay, thou art a man good enough but for thy false heart.

Court. Ab. Well, an I be a coward, there is more than I.

Cl. Col. Yea, in faith a bold man and a hardy;
A bold man in a bowl of new ale in corns!

Court. Ab. Will ye see," &c.

65. ale in corns] i.e. just drawn off the malt: see note 53 to the
Tunning of Elynour Rumming.

66. bark] qy. crake?

67. Bearest thou any room?] i.e. Do you hold any office?

68. for the arms of the dice] Some cant exclamation.

69. thou wouldest] Qy, for the rhyme, "thou wouldest, ye?"

70. we will be advised twice] i.e. we will consider of it twice.

71. My hair busheth] So Barclay, alluding to the "new fashions and
disguised garments" of the time;

"To Ship, gallants, come near, I say again, 
With your set bushes curling as men of Inde."
The Ship of Fools, fol. 8. ed. 1570.

72. To dance delight] So afterwards, Magnificence, exulting in his
prosperity, says, "I dance all in delight," v. 1510.

73. My sleeve is wide] So Barclay describes the young gallants of
the time with "Their sleeves blazing like to a Crane's wings." The
Ship of Fools, fol. 8. ed. 1570. Wide sleeves are also mentioned
in the following curious passage of Medwall's Interlude of Nature,
n. d. (written before the year 1500); the speaker is Pride:

"Behold the bonnet upon my head, 
a staring colour of scarlet red;
I promise you a fine thread, 
and a soft wool.
It cost me a noble at one pitch, 
The scald capper swore sythyche
That it cost him even as much,
But there Pride had a pull.
I love it well to have side here
Half a wote beneath mine ear;
For ever more I stand in fear 
That mine neck should take cold. 
I knit it up all the night,
and the day time comb it down right,
And then it crispeth and shineth as bright 
as any pirled gold.
My doublet is unlaced before
A stomacher of satin and no more.
Rain it, snow it, never so sore, 
Me thinketh I am too hot.
Then have I such a short gown,
With wide sleeves that hang adown,
They would make some lad in this town
a doublet and a coat.
Some men would think that this were pride; 
But it is not so; ho, ho, abide,
I have a dagger by my side, 
yet thereof spake not I.
I bought this dagger at the mart,
A sharp point and a tart, 
He that had it in his hart 
Were as good to die.
Than have I a sword or twain;
To bear them my self it were a pain; 
They are so heavy that I am fain
to purvey such a lad; 
Though I say it, a pretty boy, 
It is half my life's joy;
He maketh me laugh with many a toy,
The urchin is so mad." Sig. c ii

74. to to] So in v. 2121;

"Too flattering, too smattering, too too out of harre."

Compare Harry Whobal's moan to M. Camell, &c. (folio broadside
among the "flytings" of Churchyard and Camell;)

"My master Harry Whoball, sir, is too too shameful wroth.
 . . . . 
. . . for drink is too too nappy."

Ray gives "Too too will in two. Chesh." Proverbs, p. 163. ed.
1768.

75. Each man take a fee] there seems to be some corruption of the
text here. Qy."Each man to accuse.?"

76. From out of France] So Barclay;

"Reduce courtiers clearly unto your remembrance, 
From whence this disguising was brought wherin ye go,
As I remember it was brought out of France."
The Ship of Fooles, fol. 9. ed. 1570.

Borde, in his Boke of knowledge, introduces a French man saying,

"I am full of new inventions,
And daily I do make new toys and fashions:
All nations of me example do take,
When any garment they go about to make."
Sig. T. reprint.

77. A Tyburn check] i.e. a hangman's rope.

78. out of harre] i.e. out of hinge, out of order: see Jamieson's
Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang. and Suppl. in v. Har.

"There nas no door that he nolde heave of harre."
("There was no door that he could not lift off its hinges")
Cant. Tales. v. 552. ed. Wright.

The expression occurs again in v. 2121; and is found in the
Towneley Myst. and G. Douglas's Virgil's Aen.

79. an hawk of the tower] So again our author in the Garland of
Laurel;

"Genteel as falcon
Or hawk of the tower."
v. 1006.

i.e., says Warton, "in the King's mews in the Tower," Hist. of E.
P. ii. 355. ed. 4to: and the following lines occur in a poem
called Harmony of Birds, n. d. (attributed without authority to
Skelton), reprinted entire in Typograph. Antiq. iv. 380. ed.
Dibdin;

"The Hawks did sing,
Their bells did ring,
They said they came fro the tower.
We hold with the king
And will for him sing
To God, day, night, and hour."
p. 383.

But I apprehend that by a hawk of the tower Skelton means-a hawk
that towers aloft, takes a station high in the air, and thence
swoops upon her prey. Juliana Berners mentions certain hawks which
"ben hawks of the tower." Book of St. Albans, sig. c. v. : and
Turbervile says; "She [the hobby] is of the number of those Hawkes
that are high flying and tower Hawks." Book of Falconry, p. 53.
ed. 1611.

80. in the devil's date] See note 44 to The Bowge of Court.

81. he playeth the state] i.e. he playeth the person of
consequence.

82. thou jettest it of height] i.e. thou struttest it in high
style.

83. let us be wise] Equivalent to-let us understand.

84. come off, it were done] The expression "come off" has occurred
before; see note 13 above. Compare Mary Magdalene;

"Come off, ye harlots that it were done."
An. Mysteries from the Digby MSS. p. 97. ed. Abbotsf.

Magnus Herodes;

"Hence now go your way that ye were there."
Townley Mysteries, p. 147.

Still's Gammer Gurton's Needle;

"Sir knave, make haste Diccon were here."
Sig. E 3. ed. 1575.

See too our author's Garland of Laurel, v. 243.

85. There is many evil favoured, an thou be foul] i.e. There is
many a one ill-looking, if thou be ugly: see note 44 to Philip
Sparrow.

86. Barbed like a nun] "The feathers under the beak [of a hawk]
ben called the Barb feathers." Book of Saint Albans, sig. a 5.
Barb is explained by Tyrwhitt to mean a hood or muffler, which
covered the lower part of the face and the shoulders; Gloss. to
Chaucer's Cant. Tales: and he refers to Du Cange in v. Barbuta.
According to Strutt, it was a piece of white plaited linen, and
belonged properly to mourning: in an edict concerning "The order
and manner of apparel for great estates of women in time of
mourning," made by the mother of Henry vii. in the 8th year of his
reign, we find "Every one not being under the degree of a Baroness
to ware a barb above [Strutt prints by mistake-"about"] the chin.
And all other: as knights' wives, to wear it under their throats,
and other gentlewomen beneath the throat goyll." MS. Harl. 1354.
fol. 12. See Dress and Habits, pp. 323, 325, 326, 368, and plate
cxxxv.

87. I rede, we cease] i.e. I advise that we cease.

88. The devil speed whit!] i.e. The devil speed it not at all. So
again in our author's Why come ye not to Court;

"For as for wit,
The devil speed whit!
v. 1013.

89. a pear] used frequently by our early writers for a thing of no
value. "Vain glory of the world, the which is not worth a pear."
Morte d'Arthur, B. xv. cap. vi. vol. ii. 254. ed. Southey.

90. Make a windmill of a mat] Compare Against venomous Tongues, v.
14

91. blunder] See note 38 above.

92. thy lips hangs in thine eye] So in Th'interlude of Youth, n.
d.;

"Fain of him I would have a sight,
But my lips hang in my light."
Sig. A iiii.

See too Heywood's Dialogue, &c. sig. F 4,-Works, ed. 1598.

93. pilled] i.e. bald-mangy: see note 39 to Poems against
Garnesche.

94. Mackemurre] A proper name, (McMurrough) though not printed as
such in the old copy:

The great O'Neill, and Makmurre also,
And all the lords and kings of Ireland."
Harding's Chronicle, fol. cxlix. ed. 1543.

95. budge fur] "Budge or Lamb's fur." Minsheu's Guide into
Tongues. In an order respecting the scholastic habit in the
University of Cambridge, dated 1414, (quoted by Todd from Farmer's
papers, in a note on Milton's Comus, v. 707,) mention is made of
"furruris buggeis aut agninis." ("Budge or lamb's fur")

96. thou wilt cough me a daw] daw, i.e. simpleton. So in the
fourth line after this, "ye shall cough me a fool:" and in Lilly's
Mother Bombie, 1594; "I know he will cough for anger that I yield
not, but he shall cough me a fool for his labour." Sig. B 2.

97. so high fro me doth spring] i.e. doth grow so much taller than
I.

98. there is mine] Qy., for the rhyme, "my purse?"

99. For God's cope] So we find as an oath, "By God's blue hood."
Tom Tyler and his Wife, p. 5. ed. 1661.

100. Now take thou my dog, and give me thy fowl.] Qy. A line
wanting to rhyme with this?

101. Aungey] Does it mean Angers, or Anjou?

102. cattle] i.e. beast.

103. Nil, nihilum, nihil anglice, nifles] "Nothing, nothing,
nothing, in English, nifles." Nifles is a word sufficiently
explained by the context, and of frequent occurrence. So in A
Merry Play between Johan the Husband, Tyb his Wife, and Sir John
the Priest, 1533, attributed to Heywood;

"By God, I would ye had hawk the trifles,
The toys, the mocks, the fables, and the nifles, 
That I made thy husband to believe and think."
p. 21. reprint.

104. vilis imago.] "a cheap picture." Between this line and the
next, ed. has "Versus".

105. play well at the hoddypeak]-hoddypeak is a common term of
contempt or reproach (as in our author's Why come ye not to Court,
v. 326.), and is generally equivalent to-fool. The original
meaning of the word is altogether uncertain. Steevens note on
Gammer Gurton's Needle (explains it-hodmandod (shell-snail); and
Nares (Gloss. in v. ) is inclined to agree with him. [Qy.
compounded of hoddy, i.e. doddy, stupid, and peke, fool ?] In a
passage of Dunbar's Dance of the Seven Deadly Sins (Poems, i. 51.
ed. Laing), "hud-pykis" has been explained (on account of the
context)-misers. In Cotgrave's Dict. is "Noddy peke."

106. In a coat thou can play well the disour] Disour i.e. a low
jester, tale-teller, mimic. Ang. Sax. dysig, foolish, dizzy, &c.
"Disour, that cannot be sad (i.e. serious). Bomolochus." Prompt.
Parvul. Way. "Disour, a scoffer, saigefol." Palsgrave, p. 214. "He
can play the disour with a counterfeit face properly. Morionem
scite representat." Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. bb iiii. ed. 1530.
"One that were skilled in the crafti of disour or scoffing
fellows." Palsgrave's Acolastus, 1540. sig. H ii.

107. how put he you?] Qy. for the rhyme, "you there?"

108. Sir John] A contemptuous name for a priest; here, for a
simpleton in general.

109. cockwat] See note 12 to The Bowge of Court.

110. regardez, voyez.] "Look, see"

111. thou hast lost] Qy. for the rhyme, "for thou hast lost now?"

112. John a Bonam] One of the persons who figure in the old
metrical tale, The Hunting of the Hare, is called "Jac of Bonam:"
see Weber's Met. Rom. iii. 279.

113. theft and bribery]-bribery, i.e. pilfering. "I Bribe, I pull,
I pyll, Je bribe, (Romani) Je derobbe. Palsgrave, p. 465.
"Bribors, Cometh of the French Bribeur, i.e. Mendicus. It seemeth
in a legal Signification one that pilfereth other Men's Goods, as
Clothes out of a Window, or the like. Anno 28 Ed. 2 Stat. 1. cap.
unico." Cowel's Law Dictionary, or The interpreter, &c. augmented
and improved, &c. ed. 1727. So again our author;

"Theft also and petty bribery."
v. 1370 of the present drama.

"Some have a name for theft and bribery." 
Garland of Laurel, v. 183.

So too in The High Way to the Spital House, by Copland, n. d.;

"Bribe, and convey, from master and mistress." 
Utterson's Early Pop. Poet. ii. 37.

and in Gentleness and Nobility, n. d. (attributed without reason
to Heywood);

"For bribe and steal every thing they will, 
If they may secretly come thereuntil."
Sig. B

"Divide me like a brib'd buck, each a haunch."
Merry W. of W. v. 5. (Cited by Halliwell.)

Other passages might be cited from various poets. And see
Tyrwhitt's Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant. Tales, and Richardson's Dict.
Page 58.v. 1244.

114. He frowneth fiercely, brimly browed,
The knave would make it coy, an he could]-fiercely and brimly are
nearly synonymous: make it coy means here-affect (not merely
reserve, but) haughtiness;-and so in our author's Bowge of Court,-

"He bote the lip, he looked passing coy."
v. 288.

115. I make him lose much of their strength] "Him" should be them.
Compare l. 427 above. Perhaps these inconsistencies may have
arisen from contractions in the MS.

116. Simkin Titivell] See note 57 to Colyn Cloute.

117. Howe] i.e. ho! stop!

"Ye shall have ay quhill you cry ho."
Philotus, sig. B. ed. 1612.

"Great God defend I should be one of tho
Quhilk of their feud and malice never ho."
G. Douglas's Palace of Honour, p. 30. Bann. ed.

118. Qui fuit, Qui fuit aliquid] Literally "Who has done, Who has
done to some extent"-Phrases used in legal documents depriving
someone of his property. (ref. Bradin Cormack, A Power to do
Justice. University of Chicago Press, 2007. pp.70-71)

119. to sheer shaking nought] i.e. to sheer nothing. So in our
author's Elynour Rumming, (v. 466), that lady pronounces a couple
of stunted goslings to be "sheer shaking nought," i.e. sheer
worthless.

120. a sleight.] Ed. "Shift" Compare v. 687 & v. 964 where
"sleight" is the rhyme to "conceit".

121. Away the mare!] See note 18 to The Tunning of Elynour
Rumming.

122. a room . . in every rout] i.e. a place in every crowd,
assembly.

123. doth face and brace;] See note 4 to Against the Scots.

124. an hobby can make larks to dare]-to dare, i.e. to lurk, lie
hid. So in the poem The Doughty Duke of Albany;

"Therein, like a roil,
Sir Duncan, ye dared."
v. 270.

". . . let his grace go forward,
And dare us with his cap, like larks."
Henry VIII. Act. III. Sc. 2.

To dare larks was an expression applied to the catching of larks
by terrifying them; and there were several modes of daring them.
When the hobby (a small hawk, see note 70 to Philip Sparrow) was
employed for that purpose, the larks lay still in terror till a
net was thrown over them.-On the word dare, see Notes & Queries,
vol. vii. p. 542.

125. That I crave] Qy., for the rhyme "craved?"

126. hooks unhappy] i.e. knavish chaps.-hooks, a word frequently
applied to persons as a term of reproach. "Unhappy of manners,
maulvays." Palsgrave, p. 328. So in Jack Juggler, n.d.;

"Lo, yonder cometh that unhappy hook."
p. 26. Roxb. ed.

and in Heywood's Dialogue, &c.;

"Since thou art cross sailed, avale, unhappy hook."
Sig. E,-Works, ed. 1598.

127. Had I wist] i.e. repenting too late. See note 7 to The Death
of King Edward IV.

128. Ye have eaten sauce] Compare our author's Bowge of Court, v.
72.

129. bear a brain] i.e. look out, take heed.

130. What, can ye agree thus and appose?]-and appose, i.e. and yet
keep questioning, disputing: "He was apposed, or examined of his
belief. De religione apellatus est." Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. D ii.
Ed. 1530.

131. Jack-a-Thrum's bible] See note 57 to Poems against Garnesche.

132. Take it in worth] i.e. Be satisfied with it. See note 16 to
Against a Comely Custron.

133. And get thou] Qy. "You?", see note 115 above.

134. And the other another await] Qy. "Another time"?

135. For now, sirs, I am like as a prince should be &c.] This
speech of Magnificence is very much in the style of Herod in the
old miracle-plays: see, for instance, the Coventry Mysteries, MS.
Cott. Vesp. D. viii. fol. 92. sqq. (In ed. this speech is given to
Fancy)

136. abandon] i.e. subject completely.

"For abandoned will he not be to berne that is born."
(i.e. "For he will not be subject to any man born")
Golagros and Gawain, p. 142,
- Sir Gawaine, &c.

"Till all to you abandoned be."
Barbour's Bruce, B. iii. v. 883. ed. Jam.

137. may be seen] Qy. "May beseem?"

138. Basian the bold, for all his bribance] Basian is, I suppose,
Antoninus Bassianus Caracalla (he is called "Basian" in Robert of
Gloucester's Chron. p. 76. sqq.); bribance would seem to mean-
plundering (properly, pilfering); see note 113 above.

139. the Gothiaunce] i.e. the Goths.

140. on mould] i.e. on the earth.

141. Galba, whom his gallants garred for to gasp] i.e. (I suppose)
the Roman Emperor Galba, whom his gallants (soldiers) made to
gasp:-they assassinated him.

142. Vespasian, that bore in his nose a wasp] This passage is
explained by the following lines of a poem never printed, entitled
The Siege of Jerusalem:

"His father Vespasian ferly betide; 
A byke of wasps bred in his nose,
Hived up in his head he had hem of thought,
And Vespasian is called by cause of his wasps." 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. ii. fol. 109.

143. I shall frounce them on the foretop] To frounce is-to
wrinkle, ruffle up, &c. In our author's Phillip Sparrow, v. 1340,
Charon is described as having a "frounced foretop; "and in his
Colyn Cloute, v. 533, "fore top "means simply-head, pate.

144. take it in degree] Seems equivalent here to-take it in gree
(which occurs in v. 2005), i.e. take it kindly: see note 14 to
Against a Comely Custron.

145. elect utterance] i.e. choice expression.

146. fieffed and seised] i.e. enfeoffed and seised,-law-terms.

147. That quickly is envived with ruddies of the rose] i.e. That
is quickly enlivened with hues, or complexion, of the rose. This
somewhat pleonastic expression is found again in our author's
Garland of Laurel;

"Envived pictures well touched and quickly."
v. 1161.

148. The strains of her veins] i.e. The runnings of her veins.

"Rills rising out of every bank,
In wild meanders strain."
Drayton's Muses Elizium, p. 2. ed. 1630.

149. by Him that hell did harrow] i.e. by our Saviour: see note
145 to Philip Sparrow.

150. whilst my head did wark] i.e. until my head did ache.
"Headwark, sickness. Cephalia." Prompt. Parv. ed. 1499. "Wark, to
ache." Hunter's Hallam. Gloss. "But I may not stand, mine head
warks so." Morte d' Arthur, B. xxi. c. v. vol. ii. 440. ed.
Southey.

151. hobby for such a lusty lark] See note 124 above. The same
metaphorical use of this expression occurs in our author's Colyn
Cloute, v. 194.

152. to be sped] i.e. to be made successful.

153. make such one to the call] A metaphor from falconry.

154. omnis mulier meretrix, si celari potest.] "Every woman is a
whore, if she can do it in secret."

155. cast up your gorge] i.e. vomit up what you have swallowed.

156. blist] i.e. wounded,-thumped.

"Your lazy bones I pretend so to bliss,
That you shall have small lust to prate any more." 
The Trial of Treasure, 1567. sig. A. iiii.

157. at the contemplation] i.e. at the request of. Thus in The
Garland of Laurel:

"Of my Lady's grace at the contemplation,
Out of French into English prose,
Of Man's Life the Peregrination,
He did translate, interpret, and disclose."
v. 1221.

Compare also Holinshed; "At the contemplation of this Cardinal,
the King lent to the Emperor a great sum of money." Chron (Hen
viii) vol iii. 839 ed. 1587.

158. I will have him reheted and despised] Our early poets
frequently use rehete in the sense of-revive, cheer; a meaning
foreign to the present passage. In the Towneley Mysteries, we find
"rehett" and "rehete," pp. 143, 198, which the Gloss. explains "to
threaten;" qy. if rightly? In some copies of Chaucer's Troilus and
Creseide, B. iii. 350, is "reheting;" of which, says Tyrwhitt
(Gloss. to Cant. Tales), "I can make no sense." In G. Douglas's
Virgil's Aeneidos, B.xiii. p.467. l.53 ed. Rudd., and in the
Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy, Dunbar's Poems, ii. 74, 80. ed.
Laing, is "rehatoure," which has been referred to the French
rehair: and perhaps rehayted in our text is-re-hated (Skelton
afterwards in this piece, v. 2458, has the uncommon word
inhateth).
[Transcriber's Note: OED gives two meanings for rehete: "to cheer,
comfort or encourage" and "to attack, persecute", which latter is
clearly the meaning here.]

159. for to speed] i.e. to advance his affairs.

160. But for all that he is like to have a glent] Glent is
frequently found in the sense of-glance; but its meaning here, as
would seem from the context, is-slip, fall: and in our author's
Garland of Laurel we find,

"Go softly, she said, the stones be full glint [i. e, slippery]."
v. 572.

161. set a gnat by] i.e. value at a gnat, care a gnat for.

162. such masteries gan make]-such masteries, i.e. such
disturbances from the consequence which you assumed; and see note
18 above.

163. let see, for yourself] Qy. for the rhyme, "for yourself let
see?"-unless "for yourself" was intended to form the commencement
of the next verse.

164. my hawk is ramage] "Ramage is when a Hawk is wild, coy, or
disdainful to the man, and contrary to be reclamed." Latham's
Falconry (Explan. of Words of Art), 1658.

165. Thy words hang together as feathers in the wind.] An
expression which occurs again in our author's Speak, Parrot, v.
295. So too in a comedy, The longer thou livest, the more fool
thou art, &c. Newly compiled by W. Wager, n. d.;

"A song much like th'authour of the same,
It hangeth together like feathers in the wind."
Sig. D. ii.

166. other men have] qy. "man?"

167. I shall give you a gaud of a gosling that I gave] Gaud is
found in the sense of-jest, trick, toy, &c.: but the line (perhaps
corrupted) is beyond my comprehension.

168. Dawcock] See note 25 to The Bowge of Court.

169. your surveyor] Ed. "Supervisor:" compare v. 1414; v. 652, &c.
Cl.Col has just been made "supervisor", see v. 1808.

170. Some with the marmoll to halt I them make]-marmoll, i.e. old
sore, ulcer, gangrene. "Marmoll, a sore, loup." Palsgrave, p. 243.
Skelton recollected Chaucer;

"But great harm was it, as it thought me,
That on his shin a mormal had he."
Prol. to Cant. Tales, v. 387.

on which passage see Tyrwhitt's note.

171. And some I visit to battle, war, and murder,] for to, qy.
"with?" Compare lines 1927, 1934 or rather change the manuscript
vysyte, "visit" to yncyte, "incite".

172. Behold, how Fortune of him hath frowned] for "of," qy. "on?"

173. unliking] i.e. in poor condition of body. "The strength and
lustiness, or well liking of my body." Palsgrave's Acolastus,
1540. sig. U iiii. "I am withered," says Falstaff, "like an old
apple-john. Well, I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in
some liking." Shakespeare's Henry IV. Part I. act iii. sc. 3.

174. they run in manus tuas quick] i.e. they quickly come to be
hanged, when they say In manus tuas, Domine, commendo spiritum
meum. "Into your hands, Lord, I commend my soul."

175. dance on the lea] A fragment, it would seem, of some song.

176. the boot of all my bale] i.e. the remedy or help of all my
evil or sorrow.

"God send every good man boot of his bale." 
Chaucer's Canon's Yeoman's Tale, v. 16949. ed. Tyr.

177. I am president of princes, I prick them with pride] Qy. A
line wanting to rhyme with this?

178. totum in toto] "all in all"

179. not worth an haw] A common expression in our early poetry;

"Your woe appease which is not worth an haw."
Lydgate's Wars of Troy, B. ii. sig. I iiii. ed. 1555.

(A haw is the edible but uninteresting fruit of the whitethorn
bush)

180. Too free of the daw] Equivalent, I suppose, to-too much
fooling: see note 25 to The Bowge of Court.

181. brothel] Was formerly applied as a term of reproach to the
worthless of either sex:

"Of this day glad was many a brothel
That might have an oar with Cock Laurel." 
Cock Laurel's Boat, n. d. sig. C

182. c. s.] i.e. a hundred shillings ,or five pounds, an enormous
sum in Skelton's time.

183. occupied] Though our author, according to his occasionally
pleonastic style, has in the next line but one "occupied and
used," the words are synonymous: see note 8 to The Death of King
Edward IV.

184. some fall preaching at the Tower Hill] Qy. "fall to
preaching"? So in Th'interlude of Youth, n. d.;

"By our Lady he did promote thee
To make thee preach at the gallows tree."
Sig. B i.

185. spew and cast] One of Skelton's pleonasms.

186. a dagswain] i.e. a rough sort of coverlet. "Dagswain. Lodex."
Prompt. Parv. ed. 1499. "My bedde is cowered with a dagswain and a
quilt . . . gausape . . . "-"Some dagswains have long thrums &
jags on both sides: some but on one." Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. g
iii. ed. 1530.

187. meetly well] i.e. well enough. "Meetly: Moyennement, Assez
... Passablement." Palsgrave, p. 839. "He is meetly learned.
Mediocriter doctus est." Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. R viii. ed. 1530.

188. in the devil's date] See note 44 to The Bowge of Court

189. ding the devil]-ding, i.e. strike, knock. So again in our
author's poem The Doughty Duke of Albany;

"And the devil down ding."
v. 210.

Compare The Droichis Part of the Play, attributed to Dunbar;

"That dang the devil, and gart him yowl." 
Dunbar's Poems, ii. 38. ed. Laing.

190. wring thy be in a brake] Some cant expression: brake, see
note 44 to The Tunning of Elynour Rumming and note 128 to Why come
ye not to Court.

191. cavell] "Kevil, Kephyl, A horse, contemptuously applied to a
person, 'Thou girt (i.e. great) kevil.'" The Dialect of Craven,
&c. Compare Lydgate's verses, entitled in the Catalogue, Advices
for people to keep a guard over their tongues;

"I saw a kevell corpulent of stature,
Like a mattress raddled was his coat," &c.
MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 132.

192. javel] "Javel. Ioppus." Prompt. Parv. ed. 1499. Of this
common term of contempt (which Skelton uses in other passages) the
meaning and etymology are uncertain. Todd (Johnson's Dict. in v. )
explains it "A wandering or dirty fellow;" shows that it is
sometimes written jabel; and would derive it from the verb, javel,
jable, or jarble, to bemire, to bedew. Nares (Gloss. in v. )
refers it to the French javelle, which sometimes means "a faggot
of brushwood or other worthless materials." The compiler of the
Gloss. to The Towneley Mysteries (under Hawvelle) considers it
equivalent to-jabberer. [It has not been suggested that this word
may be only a shortened form of javelonne, jevellone, jailer. The
Lieutenant of the Tower, advising Sir Thos. More to put on worse
clothes at his execution, gave this reason, "because he that is to
have them is but a Javel" Halliwell's Dict.]

193. Here cometh in COUNTERFEIT COUNTENANCE] Ed., besides omitting
this stage direction, leaves the two following lines
unappropriated.

194. gardeviance] In a note on Dunbar's Friar of Tungland, Lord
Hailes observes that gardyvians is "literally garde de viande, or
cupboard; but there it implies his cabinet;" and Mr. D. Laing
adds, "rather, a portable cabinet." Dunbar's Poems, ii. 243.
Skelton appears to use the word in the sense of-trunk.
["'Scriniolum; a casket or forsar, a gardiviance' Elyot. 1559."
Halliwell's Dict.]

195. Your trimming and tramming by me must be tanged] The reader
will hardly expect that I should attempt any precise explanation
of this line.

196. When we with Magnificence goods made chevisaunce]-
chevisaunce, i.e. booty. Compare Gower;

"Right as a thief makes his chevisaunce,
And robbeth men's goods about," &c.
Conf. Am. B. v. fol. cxvi. ed. 1554.

197. ban and warray] "I warray, I ban or curse. Je mauldis."
Palsgrave, p. 772. Barclay is even more pleonastic than Skelton;

"And your unkindness warray, ban and curse."
The Ship of Fools, fol. 22. ed. 1570.

198. gaure] i.e. stare: see Tyrwhitt's Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant.
Tales. Yet Palsgrave has " I Gaure, I cry, Je hue. Howe he gaureth
after his hawk: Comment il heue apres son oiseau." p. 561.

199. requiem aeternam groweth forth of his nose] requiem aeternam
= "eternal rest" i.e. death. Heywood has a similar expression;

"Hunger droppeth even out of both their noses."
Dialogue, &c. sig. D 4.-Works, ed. 1598.

And Cotgrave; "Chishe-face . . . one out of whose nose hunger
drops." Dict.

200. the half street] On the Bank-side, Southwark,-where the stews
(i.e. brothels) were: it is mentioned in the following curious
passage of Cock Laurel's Boat, n. d. (where the "wind from
Winchester" alludes to the temporary suppression of the Southwark
stews at the intercession of the Bishop of Winchester);

"Sir this pardon is new found
Beside London Bridge, in a holy ground
Late called the Stews Bank.
Ye know well all that there was
Some religious women in that place,
To whom men offered many a franc,
And because they were so kind and liberal,
A marvellous adventure there is befall.
If ye list to hear how,
There came such a wind from Winchester,
That blew these women over the river,
In wherry, as I will you tell,
Some at saint Katherine's struck aground,
And many in Holborn were found.
Some at saint Giles, I trow,
Also in Ave Maria Alley, and at Westminster,
And some in Shoreditch drew thither,
With great lamentation;
And by cause they have lost that fair place,
They will build at Colman Hedge in space
Another noble mansion,
Fairer and ever the Half Street was.
For every house new paved is with grass,
Shall be full of fair flowers;
The walls shall be of hawthorn, wot well,
And hanged with white motley it sweet doth smell;
Green shall be the colours,
And as for this old place, these wenches holy
They will not have it called the stews for folly,
But maketh it Strawberry Bank." Sig. B iv.

201. mutton] Long after Skelton's time, as the readers of our
early dramatists will recollect, mutton was a favourite cant term
for a prostitute.

202. queasy meat] "Queasy as meat or drink is, dangereux."
Palsgrave, p. 321. Compare Jill of Braintford's Testament, n. d.;

"I pray you fill you not to much of the mutton;
I promise you that it is very queasy." Sig. A.

203. For the passion of God, let us go thither!] Qy. A line
wanting to rhyme with this?

204. throat boll] i.e. larynx, Adam's apple. "Throat gole or
throat boll, neu de la gorge, gosier." Palsgrave, p. 281. In Ortus
Vocab. fol. ed. W. de Worde, n. d. is "Epiglotum, a throat boll."-
"It is not impossible," says Warton, alluding to this passage,
"that Despair [Mischief] offering the knife and the halter, might
give a distant hint to Spenser." Hist. of E. P. (Em. and Ad. to p.
363 of vol. ii.) ed. 4to. See The Faerie Queene, i. ix. 50.

205. Mis. Alarum, alarum! too long we abide!] Ed. Magn.

206. Out, harrow]-harrow (variously spelt) is common in our early
poetry as an exclamation of alarm or sudden distress, or an outcry
for help. "Interjections of outcry: Haro, as Haro, alarm, trahy,
trahy." Palsgrave, p. 888. On the origin of the word see Du
Cange's Gloss. in vv. Haro, Haroep; Tyrwhitt's note on v. 3286 of
Chaucer's Cant. Tales; Jamieson's Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang. in v.
Harro; and Roquefort's Gloss. to La Lang. Rom. in v. Harau.

207. Prosperity to Him] Qy. "by Him?"

208. negligence] Qy., did Skelton write, for the rhyme,
"neglygesse?"

209. Red. First, I say, with mind firm and stable] Ed. leaves this
speech unappropriated.

210. to account you the continue of my conceit] i.e. to tell you
the continuation, the rest, of my conceit, conception.

211. that is no nay] i.e. that is not to be denied.

212. inhateth] Skelton's fondness for compound words has been
already noticed (see note 2 to The Bowge of Court) and here most
probably inhateth was not intended to convey a stronger meaning
than-hateth.

213. from you I received a letter] Qy. for the rhyme, "a letter
sent?"

214. Red. What this man hath said, perceive ye his sentence?] Qy.
Some corruption? This line ought to rhyme with the preceding line
but one. Qy. "conceit?"

215. I will refrain you further, ere we flit] i.e. I will question
you farther before we remove (refrain being here, it would seem,
according to Skelton's use of such compounds, equivalent to the
simple, and not uncommon word,-frayne).

216. this process] i.e. this drama of Magnificence: (so presently,
"this interlude" v. 2548, "this treatyse" v. 2562, "this matter"
v. 2576: see also v. 2506)

217. Pressly purposed] i.e. Briefly discoursed.

218. the terrestre rechery] If "rechery" be the right reading, I
know not what it means. Qy. "treachery? "as before, v. 2046.

"Fie on this world, full of treachery."

219. Ensorded] Could only, I presume, mean-defiled; but qy. As the
context seems to require, "Ensorbed," i.e. sucked in, swallowed?



COLYN CLOUTE
<1>
[From the ed. by Kele, n.d., collated with the ed. by Kytson,
n.d., with Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568, and with a MS.
in the Harleian Collection, 2252, fol. 147.]

HERE AFTER FOLLOWETH A LITTLE BOOK CALLED COLYN CLOUTE, COMPILED
BY MASTER SKELTON, POET LAUREATE.

Quis consurget mecum adversus malignantes? aut quis stabit mecum
adversus operantes iniquitatem? Nemo, Domine!<2>

WHAT can it avail
To drive forth a snail,<3>
Or to make a sail
Of an herring's tail;
To rhyme or to rail,
To write or to indite,
Either for delight
Or else for despite;
Or books to compile
Of divers manner style,                                        10
Vice to revile
And sin to exile;
To teach or to preach,
As reason will reach?
Say this, and say that,
His head is so fat,
He wotteth never what
Nor whereof he speaketh;
He crieth and he creaketh,
He prieth and he peeketh,<4>                                   20
He chides and he chatters,
He prates and he patters,
He clitters and he clatters,
He meddles and he smatters,
He gloses and he flatters;
Or if he speak plain,
Then he lacketh brain,
He is but a fool;
Let him go to school,
On a three-footed stool                                        30
That he may down sit,
For he lacketh wit.
And if that he hit
The nail on the head,
It standeth in no stead;
The Devil, they say, is dead,<5>
The Devil is dead.

It may well so be,
Or else they would see
Otherwise, and flee                                            40
From worldly vanity,
And foul covetousness,
And other wretchedness,
Fickle falseness,
Variableness,
With unstableness.

And if ye stand in doubt
Who brought this rhyme about,
My name is Colyn Cloute.
I purpose to shake out                                         50
All my conning bag,<6>
Like a clerkly hag;<7>
For though my rhyme be ragged,<8>
Tattered and jagged,
Rudely rain-beaten,
Rusty and moth-eaten,
If ye take well therewith,
It hath in it some pith.
For, as far as I can see,
It is wrong with each degree:                                  60
For the temporality
Accuseth the spirituality;
The spiritual again
Doth grudge and complain
Upon the temporal men:
Thus each of other blother
The one again the other.
Alas, they make me shudder!
For in hugger-mugger
The Church is put in fault;                                    70
The prelates ben so haut,
They say, and look so high,
As though they would fly
Above the starry sky.

Laymen say, indeed,
How they take no heed
Their silly sheep to feed,
But pluck away and pull
The fleeces of their wool,
Unneth they leave a lock                                       80
Of wool among their flock;
And as for their conning, 
A glumming and a mumming,<9>
And make thereof a jape;
They gasp and they gape
All to have promotion,
There is their whole devotion,
With money, if it will hap,
To catch the forked cap.<10>
Forsooth they are too lewd                                     90
To say so, all beshrewed!

What trow ye they say more
Of the bishops' lore?
How in matters they be raw,
They lumber forth the law,
To hearken Jack and Gill,
When they put up a bill,
And judge it as they will,
For other men's skill,<11>
Expounding out their clauses,                                 100
And leave their own causes.
In their provincial cure
They make but little sure,
And meddle very light
In the Church's right;
But ire and venire,<12>
And solfa so alamire,<13>
That the praemunire
Is like to be set afire
In their jurisdictions                                        110
Through temporal afflictions:
Men say they have prescriptions
Against spiritual contradictions,
Accounting them as fictions.

And while the heads do this,
The remnant is amiss
Of the clergy all,
Both great and small. 
I wot never how they wark,
But thus the people bark;<14>                                 120
And surely thus they say,
Bishops, if they may,
Small houses would keep,
Not slumber forth and sleep,
And essay to creep
Within the noble walls
Of the king's halls,
To fat their bodies full,
Their souls lean and dull,
And have full little care                                     130
How evil their sheep fare.

The temporality say plain,
How bishops disdain
Sermons for to make,
Or such labour to take;
And, for to say truth,
A great part is for sloth,
But the greatest part
Is for they have but small art
And right slender conning                                     140
Within their heads wonning.<15>
But this reason they take
How they are able to make
With their gold and treasure
Clerkes out of measure,
And yet that is a pleasure.
Howbeit some there be,
Almost two or three,
Of that dignity,
Full worshipful clerks,                                       150
As appeareth by their Works,
Like Aaron and Ure,<16>
The wolf from the door
To werrin and to keep
From their ghostly sheep,
And their spiritual lambs
Sequestered from rams
And from the bearded goats
With their hairy coats;
Set nought by gold ne groats,                                 160
Their names if I durst tell!

But they are loth to mell,
And loth to hang the bell
About the cat's neck,<17>
For dread to have a check;
They are fain to play deuz deck<18>
They are made for the beck.<19>
Howbeit they are good men,
Much hearted like an hen:
Their lessons forgotten they have                             170
That Becket them gave:
Thomas manum mittit ad fortia,
Spernit damna, spernit opprobria,
Nulla Thomam frangit injuria.<20>
But now every spiritual father,
Men say, they had rather
Spend much of their share
Than to be cumbered with care:
Spend! nay, nay, but spare;
For let see who that dare                                     180
Shoe the mockish mare;<21>
They make her wince and kick,
But it is not worth a leek.<22>
Boldness is to seek
The Church for to defend.
Take me as I intend,
For loth I am to offend
In this that I have penned:
I tell you as men say.
Amend when ye may,                                            190
For, usque ad montem Sare,<23>
Men say ye cannot appare
For some say ye hunt in parks,
And hawk on hobby larks,<24>
And other wanton warks,
When the night darks.

What hath laymen to do
The gray goose for to shoe?<25>
Like hounds of hell,
They cry and they yell,                                       200
How that ye sell
The grace of the Holy Ghost:
Thus they make their boast
Throughout every coast,
How some of you do eat
In Lenten season flesh meat,
Pheasants, partridge, and cranes;
Men call you therefore profanes;
Ye pick no shrimps nor prawns,
Salt-fish, stock-fish, nor herring,                           210
It is not for your wearing;
Nor in holy Lenten season
Ye will neither beans ne peason,
But ye look to be let loose
To a pig or to a goose,
Your gorge not endewed
Without a capon stewed,<26>
Or a stewed cock,<27>
To know what is o'clock
Under her surfled smock,<28>                                  220
And her wanton woodcock.

And how when ye give orders
In your provincial borders,
As at Sitientes,
Some are insufficientes,
Some parum sapientes,
Some nihil intelligentes,
Some valde negligentes,
Some nullum sensum habentes,<29>
But bestial and untaught;                                     230
But when they have once caught
Dominus vobiscum by the head<30>,
Then run they in every stead,<31>
God wot, with drunken nolls;
Yet take they cure of souls,
And wotteth never what they read,
Paternoster, Ave, nor Creed;
Construe not worth a whistle
Neither Gospel nor Epistle;
Their matins madly said,                                      240
Nothing devoutly prayed;
Their learning is so small,
Their primes and hours fall<32>
And leap out of their lips
Like sawdust or dry chips.
I speak not now of all,
But the most part in general.
Of such vagabundus<33>
Speaketh totus mundus;<34>
How some sing Laetabundus<35>                                 250
At every ale stake,
With, Welcome, hake and make!<36>
By the bread that God brake,
I am sorry for your sake.
I speak not of the good wife,
But of their apostles life;
Cum ipsis vel illis
Qui manent in villis
Est uxor vel ancilla,<37>
Welcome Jack and Gylla!                                       260
My pretty Petronilla,
An you will be stilla,
You shall have your willa!
Of such Paternoster peaks
All the world speaks.

In you the fault is supposed,
For that they are not apposed
By just examination
In conning and conversation;
They have none instruction                                    270
To make a true construction:
A priest without a letter,
Without his virtue be greater,
Doubtless were much better
Upon him for to take
A mattock or a rake.
Alas, for very shame!
Some cannot decline their name;
Some cannot scarcely read,
And yet he will not dread                                     280
For to keep a cure,
And in nothing is sure;
This Dominus vobiscum,<38>
As wise as Tom-a-Thrum,<39>
A chaplain of trust
Layeth all in the dust.

Thus I, Colyn Cloute,
As I go about,
And wandering as I walk
I hear the people talk.                                       290
Men say, for silver and gold
Mitres are bought and sold;
There shall no clergy appose
A mitre nor a crose,
But a full purse:<40>
A straw for God's curse!
What are they the worse?
For a simoniac
Is but a hermoniac;
And no more ye make                                           300
Of simony, men say,
But a child's play.

Over this, the foresaid lay,<41>
Report how the Pope may
An holy anchor call
Out of the stone wall,
And him a bishop make,
If he on him can take
To keep so hard a rule,
To ride upon a mule<42>                                       310
With golde all betrapped,
In purple and pall<43> belapped;
Some hatted and some capped,
Richly and warm bewrapped,
God wot to their great pains
In rochets of fine Rennes,
White as morrow's milk;
Their tabards<44> of fine silk,
Their stirrups of mixed gold begared<45>;
There may no cost be spared.                                  320
Their mules gold doth eat,
Their neighbours die for meat.

What care they though Gill sweat,
Or Jack of the Noke?<46>
The poor people they yoke
With summons and citations
And excommunications,
About churches and market:
The bishop on his carpet
At home full soft doth sit.                                   330
This is a farly fit,
To hear the people jangle,
How warlike they wrangle:
Alas, why do ye not handle
And them all to-mangle?
Full falsely on you they lie,
And shamefully you ascry,
And say as untruly,
That a butterfly
A man might say in mock                                       340
Ware <MS "wasa">the weathercock
Of the steeple of Paul's;
And thus they hurt their souls
In slandering you for truth:
Alas, it is great ruth!
Some say ye sit in thrones,
Like princes aquilonis,<48>
And shrine your rotten bones
With pearls and precious stones;
But how the commons groans,                                   350
And the people moans
For prests and for loans<49>
Lent and never paid,
But from day to day delayed,
The commonwealth decayed,
Men say ye are tongue-tied,
And thereof speak nothing
But dissimuling and glozing.
Wherefore men be supposing
That ye give shrewd counsel                                   360
Against the common weal,
By polling and pillage,
In cities and village,
By taxing and tollage,
Ye make monks to have the culerage
For covering of an old cottage,
That committed is a college
In the charter of dotage,
Tenure par service de sottage,
And not par service de socage,<50>                            370
After old seigneurs,
And the learning of Littleton Tenures:<51>
Ye have so overthwarted,
That good laws are subverted,
And good reason perverted.

Religious men are fain
For to turn again
In secula seculorum,<52>
And to forsake their quorum
And vagabundare per forum,<53>                                380
And take a fine meritorum,
Contra regulam morum,
Aut black monachorum,
Aut canonicorum,
Aut Bernardinorum,
Aut crucifixorum,<54>
And to sing from place to place,
Like apostates.

And the selfsame game
Begun is now with shame                                       390
Among the silly nuns:
My lady now she runs,
Dame Sibyl our abbess,
Dame Dorothy and Lady Bess,
Dame Sarah our prioress,
Out of their cloister and choir
With an heavy cheer,
Must cast up their black veils
And set up their fuck-sails, <55>
To catch wind with their ventales-                            400
What, Colyn, there thou shales!
Yet thus with ill-hails
The lay fee people<56> rails.

And all the fault they lay
On your precept, and say
Ye do them wrong and no right
To put them thus to flight;
No matins at midnight,
Book and chalice gone quite;
And pluck away the leads                                      410
Even over their heads,
And sell away their bells,
And all that they have else:
Thus the people tells,
Rails like rebels,
Redes shrewdly and spells,
And with foundations mells,
And talks like titivils,<57>
How ye brake the dead's wills,
Turn monasteries into water mills,                            420
Of an abbey ye make a grange<58>;
Your works, they say, are strange;
So that their founders souls
Have lost their bead-rolls,
The money for their masses
Spent among wanton lasses;
The Diriges are forgotten;
Their founders lie there rotten,
But where their souls dwell,
Therewith I will not mell.                                    430
What could the Turk do more
With all his false lore,
Turk, Saracen, or Jew?
I report me to you,
O merciful Jesu,
Your support and rescue,
My style for to direct,
It may take some effect!
For I abhor to write
How the lay fee despite                                       440
You prelates, that of right
Should be lanterns of light.
Ye live, they say, in delight,
Drowned in deliciis,
In gloria et divitiis,
In admirabili honore,
In gloria et splendore
Fulgurantis hastae,
Viventes parum caste:<59>
Yet sweet meat hath sour sauce:                               450
For after gloria, laus,<60>
Christ by cruelty
Was nailed upon a tree;
He paid a bitter pension
For man's redemption,
He drank eisel and gall
To redeem us withal;
But sweet hippocras<61> ye drink,
With, Let the cat wink!<62>
Each wot what each other think;                               460
Howbeit, per assimile<63>
Some men think that ye
Shall have penalty
For your iniquity.
Nota what I say,
And bear it well away;
If it please not theologues,
It is good for astrologues:
For Ptolemy told me
The sun sometime to be                                        470
In Ariete <64>
Ascendant a degree<65>,
When Scorpion descending
Was so then portending
A fatal fall of one <66>
That should sit on a throne,
And rule all things alone.
Your teeth whet on this bone
Amongst you everichon,
And let Colyn Cloute have none<67>                            480
Manner of cause to moan:
Lay salve to your own sore,
For else, as I said before,
After gloria, laus,<60>
May come a sour sauce;
Sorry therefore am I,
But truth can never lie.

With language thus polluted
Holy Church is bruited
And shamefully confuted.                                      490
My pen now will I sharp,
And wrest up my harp
With sharp twinking trebles,
Against all such rebels
That labour to confound
And bring the Church to the ground;
As ye may daily see
How the lay fee
Of one affinity
Consent and agree                                             500
Against the Church to be,
And the dignity
Of the bishop's see.

And either ye be too bad,
Or else they are mad
Of this to report:
But, under your support,
Till my dying day
I shall both write and say,
And ye shall do the same,                                     510
How they are to blame
You thus to defame:
For it maketh me sad
How that the people are glad
The Church to deprave;
And some there are that rave,
Presuming on their wit,
When there is never a whit
To maintain arguments
Against the sacraments.                                       520
Some make epilogation
Of high predestination;
And of recidivation
They make interpretation
Of an awkward fashion;
And of the prescience
Of divine essence;
And what hypostasis
Of Christ's manhood is.
Such logic men will chop,                                     530
And in their fury hop,
When the good ale sop
Doth dance in their foretop;<68>
Both women and men,
Such ye may well know and ken,
That against priesthood
Their malice spread abroad,
Railing heinously
And disdainously
Of priestly dignities,                                        540
But their malignities.<69>

And some have a smack
Of Luther's sack,<70>
And a burning spark
Of Luther's wark,
And are somewhat suspect
In Luther's sect;
And some of them bark,
Clatter and carp
Of that heresiarch                                            550
Called Wicliffista,<71>
The devilish dogmatista;
And some be Hussians,<72>
And some be Arians,
And some be Pelagians,
And make much variance
Between the clergy
And the temporalty,
How the Church hath too mickle,<73>
And they have too little,                                     560
And bring in materialities
And qualified qualities;
Of pluralities,
Of trialities,
And of tot-quots<74>,
They commune like sots,
As cometh to their lots;
Of prebendaries and deans,
How some of them gleans
And gathereth up the store                                    570
For to catch more and more;
Of parsons and vicaries
They make many outcries;
They cannot keep their wives
From them for their lives;
And thus the losels strives,
And lewdly says, by Christ,
Against the silly priest.
Alas, and wellaway,
What ails them thus to say?                                   580
They mought be better advised
Than to be so disguised:
But they have enterprised,
And shamefully surmised,
How prelacy is sold and bought,
And come up of nought;
And where the prelates be
Come of low degree,
And set in majesty
And spiritual dignity,                                        590
Farewell benignity,
Farewell simplicity,
Farewell humility,
Farewell good charity!

Ye are so puffed with pride,
That no man may abide
Your high and lordly looks:
Ye cast up then your books,
And virtue is forgotten;
For then ye will be wroken                                    600
Of every light quarrel,
And call a lord a javel,
A knight a knave ye make;
Ye boast, ye face, ye crake,
And upon you ye take
To rule both king and kaiser;
An if ye may have leisure,
Ye will bring all to nought,
And that is all your thought:
For the lords temporal,                                       610
Their rule is very small,
Almost nothing at all.
Men say how ye appal
The noble blood royal:
In earnest and in game,
Ye are the less to blame,
For lords of noble blood,
If they well understood
How conning might them advance,
They would pipe you another dance:                            620
But noblemen born
To learn they have scorn,
But hunt and blow an horn,
Leap over lakes and dykes,<75>
Set nothing by politics;
Therefore ye keep them base,
And mock them to their face:
This is a piteous case,
To you that be on the wheel
Great lords must crouch and kneel,                            630
And break their hose at the knee,
As daily men may see,
And to remembrance call.
Fortune so turneth the ball
And ruleth so over all,
That honour hath a great fall.

Shall I tell you more? yea, shall.
I am loth to tell all;
But the commonalty you call
Idols of Babylon,                                             640
De Terra<76> Zabulon,
De Terra Neptalim;
For ye love to go trim,
Brought up of poor estate,
With pride inordinate,
Suddenly upstart
From the dung-cart,
The mattock and the shule,
To reign and to rule;
And have no grace to think                                    650
How ye were wont to drink
Of a leather bottle
With a knavish stopple,
When mammocks was your meat,
With mouldy bread to eat;
Ye could none other get
To chew and to gnaw,
To fill therewith your maw;
Lodging in fair straw,
Couching your drowsy heads                                    660
Sometime in lousy beds.
Alas, this is out of mind!
Ye grow now out of kind.
Many one ye have untwined,<77>
And made the commons blind.
But qui se existimat stare,<78>
Let him well beware
Lest that his foot slip,
And have such a trip,
And fall in such decay,                                       670
That all the world may say,
Come down, in the devil way!<79>

Yet, over all that,
Of bishops they chat,
That though ye round your hair
An inch above your ear,
And have aures patentes <80>
And parum intendentes,<81>
And your tonsures be cropped,
Your ears they be stopped;                                    680
For Master Adulator,<82>
And Doctor Assentator,<83>
And Blandior blandiris,<84>
With Mentior mentiris,<85>
They follow your desires,
And so they blear your eye,
That ye cannot espy
How the male doth wry.

Alas, for God's will,
Why sit ye, prelates, still                                   690
And suffer all this ill?
Ye bishops of estates<86>
Should open the broad gates
Of your spiritual charge,
And come forth at large,
Like lanterns of light,
In the people's sight,
In pulpits authentic,
For the weal public
Of priesthood in this case;                                   700
And always to chase
Such manner of schismatics
And half heretics,
That would intoxicate,
That would coinquinate,
That would contaminate,
And that would violate,
And that would derogate,
And that would abrogate
The Church's high estates,<87>                                710
After this manner rates,
The which should be
Both frank and free,
And have their liberty,
As of antiquity
It was ratified,
And also gratified,
By holy synodals
And bulls papals,
As it is res certa<88>                                        720
Contained in Magna Charta.

But Master Damyan,
Or some other man,
That clerkly is and can
Well scripture expound
And his texts ground,
His benefice worth ten pound,
Or scant worth twenty mark,
And yet a noble clerk,
He must do this wark;                                         730
As I know a part,
Some masters of art,
Some doctors of law,
Some learned in other saw,
As in divinity,
That hath no dignity
But the poor degree
Of the university;
Or else friar Frederic,
Or else friar Dominic,                                        740
Or friar Hugulinus,
Or friar Augustinus,
Or friar Carmelus,
That ghostly can heal us;
Or else if we may
Get a friar gray,
Or else of the order
Upon Greenwich border,<89>
Called Observance,
Or a friar of France;                                         750
Or else the poor Scot,
It must come to his lot
To shoot forth his shot;
Or of Babwell beside Bury,<90>
To postil upon a Kyrie,<91>
That would it should be noted
How scripture should be quoted,
And so clerkly promoted;
And yet the friar doted.

But men say your authority,                                   760
And your noble see,
And your dignity,
Should be imprinted better
Than all the friars' letter;
For if ye would take pain
To preach a word or twain,
Though it were never so plain,
With clauses two or three,
So as they might be
Compendiously conveyed,                                       770
These words should be more weighed,
And better perceived,
And thankfullerly received,
And better should remain
Among the people plain,
That would your words retain
And rehearse them again,
Than a thousand thousand other,
That blabber, bark, and blother,
And make a Welshman's hose                                    780
Of the text and of the glose.<92>

For protestation made,
That I will not wade
Farther in this brook,
Nor farther for to look
In devising of this book,
But answer that I may
For myself alway,
Either analogice
Or else categorice,                                           790
So that in divinity
Doctors that learned be,
Nor bachelors of that faculty
That hath taken degree
In the university,
Shall not be object at by me.

But Doctor Bullatus,
Parum litteratus,
Dominus doctoratus<93>
At the Broad Gatus,<94>                                       800
Doctor Dawpatus,<95>
And bachelor bacheleratus,
Drunken as a mouse,<96>
At the ale house,
Taketh his pillion and his cap<97>
At the good ale tap,
For lack of good wine;
As wise as Robin swine,
Under a notary's sign
Was made a divine;                                            810
As wise as Waltham's calf,<98>
Must preach, a God's half,<99>
In the pulpit solemnly;
More meet in the pillory,
For, by Saint Hilary,
He can nothing smatter
Of logic nor school matter,
Neither syllogisare,<100>
Nor enthymemare,<101>
Nor knoweth his elenches,                                     820
Nor his predicamentes;
And yet he will mell
To amend the Gospel,
And will preach and tell
What they do in hell;
And he dare not well neven
What they do in heaven,
Nor how far Temple Bar is
From the Seven Stars.

Now will I go                                                 830
And tell of other mo,
Semper protestando
De non impugnando<102>
The four orders of friars,
Though some of them be liars;
As limiters at large
Will charge and discharge;
As many a friar, God wote,
Preaches for his groat,
Flattering for a new coat<104>                                840
And for to have his fees;
Some to gather cheese;
Loth they are to lese
Either corn or malt;
Sometime meal and salt,
Sometime a bacon flick,
That is three fingers thick
Of larde and of grease,
Their convent to increase.

I put you out of doubt,                                       850
This cannot be brought about
But they their tongues file,<104>
And make a pleasant style
To Margery and to Maud,
How they have no fraud;<105>
And sometime they provoke
Both Gill and Jack at Noke<106>
Their duties to withdraw,
That they ought by law
Their curates to content                                      860
In open time and Lent:
God wot, they take great pain
To flatter and to feign;
But it is an old said saw,
That need hath no law.
Some walk about in melottes,<107>
In gray russet and hairy coats;
Some will neither gold nor groats;
Some pluck a partridge in remotes,<108>
And by the bars of her tail                                   870
Will know a raven from a rail,
A quail, the rail, and the old raven:
Sed libera nos a malo<109>! Amen.
And by Dudum, their Clementine,
Against curates they repine;
And say properly they are sacerdotes,
To shrive, assoil, and release
Dame Margery's soul out of hell:<110>
But when the friar fell in the well,
He could not sing himself thereout                            880
But by the help of Christian Clout.<111>
Another Clementine also,
How friar Fabian, and mo,
Exivit de Paradiso;<112>
When they again thither shall come,
De hoc petimus consilium:<113>
And through all the world they go
With Dirige and Placebo.<114>

But now my mind ye understand,
For they must take in hand                                    890
To preach, and to withstand
All manner of objections;
For bishops have protections,
They say, to do corrections,
But they have no affections
To take the said directions;
In such manner of cases,
Men say, they bear no faces
To occupy such places,
To sow the seed of graces:                                    900
Their hearts are so fainted,
And they be so attainted
With covetise and ambition,
And other superstition,
That they be deaf and dumb,
And play silence and glum,<115>
Can say nothing but mum.

They occupy them so
With singing Placebo,
They will no farther go:                                      910
They had liefer to please,
And take their worldly ease,
Than to take on hand
Worshipfully to withstand
Such temporal war and bate,
As now is made of late
Against Holy Church estate,
Or to maintain good quarrels.
The lay men call them barrels
Full of gluttony                                              920
And of hypocrisy,
That counterfeits and paints<116>
As they were very saints:
In matters that them like
They show them politic,
Pretending gravity
And signiority,
With all solemnity,
For their indemnity;
For they will have no loss                                    930
Of a penny nor of a cross<117>
Of their predial lands,
That cometh to their hands,
And as far as they dare set,
All is fish that cometh to net:
Building royally
Their mansions curiously,
With turrets and with towers,
With halls and with bowers,
Stretching to the stars,                                      940
With glass windows and bars;
Hanging about the walls
Cloths of gold and palls,<118>
Arras<119> of rich array,
Fresh as flowers in May;
With dame Diana naked;
How lusty Venus quaked,
And how Cupid shaked
His dart, and bent his bow
For to shoot a crow                                           950
At her tirly tirlow;<120>
And how Paris of Troy
Danced a lege de moy,<121>
Made lusty sport and joy
With dame Helen the queen;
With such stories bedene<122>
Their chambers well beseen<123>;
With Triumphs of Caesar,
And of Pompeius' war,
Of renown and of fame,                                        960
By them to get a name:
Now all the world stares,<124>
How they ride in goodly chairs,
Conveyed by elephants,
With laureate garlands,
And by unicorns
With their seemly horns;
Upon these beasts riding,
Naked boys striding,
With wanton wenches winking.                                  970
Now truly, to my thinking,
That is a speculation
And a meet meditation
For prelates of estate,<125>
Their courage to abate
From worldly wantonness,
Their chambers thus to dress
With such parfitness<126>
And all such holiness;
Howbeit they let down fall                                    980
Their churches cathedral.

Squire, knight, and lord,
Thus the Church remord;
With all temporal people
They run against the steeple,
Thus talking and telling
How some of you are melling;
Yet soft and fair for swelling,
Beware of a quean's yelling.
It is a busy thing                                            990
For one man to rule a king<127>
Alone and make reckoning,
To govern over all
And rule a realm royal
By one man's very wit;
Fortune may chance to flit,
And when he weeneth to sit,
Yet may he miss the cushion:
For I rede a preposition,
Cum regibus amicare,                                         1000
Et omnibus dominari,
Et supra te pravare<128>;
Wherefore he hath good eure<129>
That can himself assure
How fortune will endure.
Then let reason you support,
For the commonalty doth report
That they have great wonder
That ye keep them so under;
Yet they marvel so much less,                                1010
For ye play so at the chess,
As they suppose and guess,
That some of you but late
Hath played so checkmate<130>
With lords of great estate,
After such a rate,
That they shall mell nor make,
Nor upon them take,
For king nor kaiser sake,
But at the pleasure of one<131>                              1020
That ruleth the roost alone.

Helas, I say, helas!
How may this come to pass,
That a man shall hear a mass,
And not so hardy on his head<132>
To look on God in form of bread,<133>
But that the parish clerk
Thereupon must hark,
And grant him at his asking
For to see the sacring?                                      1030

And how may this accord,
No man to our sovereign lord
So hardy to make suit,
Nor yet to execute
His commandment,
Without the assent
Of our president,
Nor to express to his person,
Without your consentation
Grant him his licence                                        1040
To press to his presence,
Nor to speak to him secretly,
Openly nor privily,
Without his president be by,
Or else his substitute
Whom he will depute?
Neither earl ne duke
Permitted? By saint Luke,
And by sweet saint Mark,
This is a wondrous wark!                                     1050
That the people talk this,<134>
Somewhat there is amiss:
The Devil cannot stop their mouths,
But they will talk of such uncouths,
All that ever they ken
Against all spiritual men.

Whether it be wrong or right,
Or else for despite,
Or however it hap,
Their tongues thus do clap,                                  1060
And through such detraction
They put you to your action;
And whether they say truly
As they may abide thereby,
Or else that they do lie,
Ye know better than I.
But now debetis scire,<135>
And groundly audire,<136>
In your convenire,<137>
Of this praemunire,                                          1070
Or else in the mire
They say they will you cast;
Therefore stand sure and fast.

Stand sure, and take good footing,
And let be all your mooting,<138>
Your gasping and your tooting,
And your partial promoting
Of those that stand in your grace;
But old servants ye chase,
And put them out of their place.                             1080
Make ye no murmuration,
Though I write after this fashion;
Though I, Colyn Cloute,
Among the whole rout
Of you that clerkes be,
Take now upon me
Thus copiously to write,
I do it for no despite.
Wherefore take no disdain
At my style rude and plain;                                  1090
For I rebuke no man
That virtuous is: why then
Wreak ye your anger on me?
For those that virtuous be
Have no cause to say
That I speak out of the way.

Of no good bishop speak I,
Nor good priest I escry,
Good friar, nor good chanon,
Good nun, nor good canon,                                    1100
Good monk, nor good clerk,
Nor yet of no good work:
But my recounting is
Of them that do amiss,
In speaking and rebelling,
In hindering and disavailing
Holy Church, our mother,
One against another;
To use such despiting
Is all my whole writing;                                     1110
To hinder no man,
As near as I can,
For no man have I named:
Wherefore should I be blamed?
Ye ought to be ashamed,
Against me to be gramed,<139>
And can tell no cause why,
But that I write truly.

Then if any there be
Of high or low degree                                        1120
Of the spirituality,
Or of the temporality,
That doth think or ween
That his conscience be not clean,
And feeleth himself sick,
Or touched on the quick,
Such grace God them send
Themself to amend,
For I will not pretend
Any man to offend.                                           1130

Wherefore, as thinketh me,
Great idiots they be,
And little grace they have,
This treatise to deprave;
Nor will hear no preaching,
Nor no virtuous teaching,
Nor will have no reciting
Of any virtuous writing;
Will know none intelligence
To reform their negligence,                                  1140
But live still out of fashion,
To their own damnation.
To do shame they have no shame,
But they would no man should them blame:
They have an evil name,
But yet they will occupy the same.

With them the word of God
Is counted for no rod;
They count it for a railing,
That nothing is availing;                                    1150
The preachers with evil hailing:
Shall they daunt us prelates;
That be their primates?
Not so hardy on their pates!<140>
Hark, how the losel prates,
With a wide weasand!
Avaunt, sir Guy of Gaunt!<141>
Avaunt, lewd priest, avaunt!
Avaunt, sir doctor Deuce-ace!<142>
Prate of thy matins and thy mass,                            1160
And let our matters pass!
How darest thou, dawcock, mell?
How darest thou, losel,
Allegate the Gospel
Against us of the council?
Avaunt to the devil of hell!
Take him, Warden of the Fleet,
Set him fast by the feet!
I say, Lieutenant of the Tower,
Make this lurdan for to lour;                                1170
Lodge him in Little Ease,
Feed him with beans and peas!
The King's Bench or Marshalsea,
Have him thither by and by!
The villain preacheth openly,
And declareth our villany;
And of our free simpleness
He says that we are reckless,
And full of wilfulness,
Shameless and merciless,                                     1180
Incorrigible and insatiate;
And after this rate
Against us doth prate.

At Paul's Cross or elsewhere,
Openly at Westminster,
And Saint Mary Spital,<143>
They set not by us a whistle:<144>
At the Austin Friars<145>
They count us for liars:
And at Saint Thomas of Acre's<146>                           1190
They clack of us like crakers,
How we will rule all at will
Without good reason or skill;<147>
And say how that we be
Full of partiality;
And how at a prong
We turn right into wrong,
Delay causes so long.
That right no man can fong;
They say many matters be born                                1200
By the right of a ram's horn.<148>
Is not this a shameful scorn,
To be teared thus and torn?

How may we this endure?
Wherefore we make you sure,
Ye preachers shall be yawed;
And some shall be sawed,
As noble Isaias,<149>
The holy prophet, was;
And some of you shall die,                                   1210
Like holy Jeremy;
Some hanged, some slain,
Some beaten to the brain;
And we will rule and reign,
And our matters maintain,
Who dare say there again,
Or who dare disdain,
At our pleasure and will:
For, be it good or be it ill,
As it is, it shall be still,                                 1220
For all master doctor of Civil,
Or of Divine, or doctor Drivel,
Let him cough, rough, or snivel<150>;
Run God, run Devil,
Run who may run best,
And let take all the rest!
We set not a nut-shell<151>
The way to heaven or hell.

Lo, this is the guise nowadays!
It is to dread, men says,                                    1230
Lest they be Sadducees,
As they be said sayne,<152>
Which determined plain
We should not rise again
At dreadful doomesday; 
And so it seemeth they play,
Which hate to be corrected
When they be infected,
Nor will suffer this book
By hook ne by crook                                          1240
Printed for to be,
For that no man should see
Nor read in any scrolls
Of their drunken nolls,
Nor of their noddypolls,
Nor of their silly souls,
Nor of some witless pates
Of divers great estates,<153>
As well as other men.

Now to withdraw my pen,                                      1250
And now a while to rest,
Meseemeth it for the best.

The forecastle of my ship
Shall glide, and smoothly slip
Out of the waves wood
Of the stormy flood;
Shoot anchor, and lie at road,
And sail not far abroad,<154>
Till the coast be clear,
And the lode-star appear:                                    1260
My ship now will I steer
Toward the port salu<155>
Of our Saviour Jesu,
Such grace that He us send,
To rectify and amend
Things that are amiss,
When that His pleasure is.
Amen!

In opere imperfecto,
In opere semper perfecto,
Et in opere plusquam perfecto!<156>                          1270

Colinus Cloutus, quanquam mea carmina multis
Sordescunt stultus, sed puevinate sunt rare cultis,
Pue vinatis altisem divino flamine flatis.
Unde mea refert tanto minus, invida quamvis
Lingua nocere parat, quia, quanquam rustica canto,
Undique cantabor tamen et celebrabor ubique,
Inclita dum maneat gens Anglica. Laurus honoris,
Quondam regnorum regina et gloria regum,
Heu, modo marcescit, tabescit, languida torpet!
Ah pudet, ah miseret! vetor hic ego pandere plura
Pro gemitu et lacrimis: praestet peto praemia paena.<157>



NOTES TO COLYN CLOUTE

1. This powerful and original poem must have been circulated in
MS., probably for a considerable time, before it was given to the
press; for from a passage towards the conclusion, v. 1239, we
learn that those against whom its satire was directed would not
"suffer it to be printed." In Colyn Cloute, Skelton appears to
have commenced his attacks on Wolsey.

"I could never conceive, Mr. Warton, to what Drayton alludes, in
the preface to his Eclogues, where he says, that 'the Colyn Cloute
of SCOGAN, under Henry the Seventh, is pretty.' He is speaking of
pastoral poetry; and adds that Barklays ship of fools hath twenty
wiser in it.' You somewhere say [Hist. of E. P. iii. 76, note, ed.
4to], 'he must mean SKELTON; but what PASTORAL did HE write?"
Ritson's Obs. on Warton's Hist. of E. P., p. 20 (note); see too
his Bibl. Poet., p. 99. I believe that Drayton did mean Skelton.
Colyn Cloute is surely as much a pastoral as Barclay's Ship of
Fooles,-as much perhaps as even Barclay's Egloges.

2. Quis consurget mecum adversus malignantes? Aut quis stabit
mecum adversus operantes iniquitatem? Nemo, Domine!] "Who will
rise up with me against evil-doers? or who will stand up with me
against the workers of iniquity? No one, O Lord!" Vulg. Psal.
xciii. 16.

3. What can it avail
To drive forth a snail] So in Gentleness and Nobility, n. d.
(attributed without grounds to Heywood);

"In effect it shall no more avail
Than with a whip to drive a snail."
Sig. C ii.

4. He prieth and he peeketh] "I peek or I pry." Palsgrave p.655.
So Gascoigne;

"That other pries and peeks in every place."
The Steel Glass, fol. 301,-Works, ed. 1587.

5. The devil, they say, is dead] Heywood has six Epigrams on this
proverbial expression,-Works, sig. N 2. ed. 1598. Ray gives,
"Heigh ho, the Devil is dead." Proverbs, p. 55. ed. 1768.

6. conning bag] i.e. bag, store, of knowledge or learning.

7. hag] See note 12 to Divers Ballads and Ditties Solacious.

8. though my rhyme be ragged] So Sir D. Lynd say; "my rural ragged
verse." Prol. to Monarchy,-Works, ii. 330 ed Chalmers; and
Spenser, "My ragged rhymes." F. Queene, xii. 23.

9. a mumming] Compare our author elsewhere;

"Men of such matters make but a mumming."
Garland of Laurel, v. 200.

"There was among them no word then but mum."
Id. v. 1118

"But play silence and glum,
Can say nothing but mum."
v. 906 of the present poem.

10. the forked cap] i.e. the mitre.

"No wise man is desirous to obtain
The forked cap without he worthy be."
Barclay's Ship of Fools, fol. 236. ed. 1570.

11. For other men's skill]-skill, i.e. reason: the line seems to
mean-Notwithstanding other men's reasons.

12. ire and venire] "come and go."

13. solfa so alamire]-alamire is the lowest note but one in Guido
Aretine's scale of music: Gayton, in his Notes upon Don Quixote,
1654, says (metaphorically) that Maritornes "played her part so
well, that she run through all the keys from A-la-mi-re to double
Gammut," &c. p. 83.

14. But thus the people bark;] So MS. Eds. have "carke." Qy.
"carp?" Compare v 542.

15. A great part is for sloth,
But the greatest part
Is they have little art
And right slender conning
Within their heads wonning.] slender conning, i.e. slender
knowledge, learning: wonning, i. e dwelling. The meaning of the
passage is-a great part of this is owing to their laziness, but it
is chiefly to be attributed to their ignorance, &c.

16. Ure] i.e. Uriah.

17. loth to hang the bell
About the cat's neck] So Heywood;

"And I will hang the bell about the cat's neck:
For I will first break and jeopard the first check."
Dialogue, &c. sig. D 3,-Works, ed. 1598.

See Piers Plowman, where one of the rats proposes that a bell
should be hung about the cat's neck. Sig. A ed. 1561; and Ray's
Proverbs, p. 85. ed. 1768.

18. to play deuz deck] An allusion, I suppose, to some game.

19. for the beck] i.e. to obey the nod of command.

20. manum mittit ad fortia,
Spernit damna, spernit opprobria,
Nulla Thomam frangit injuria.] "He puts his hand to braver things,
spurns loss, spurns dishonour, no damage can break Thomas."

21. Shoe the mockish mare] So in our author's Why come ye not to
Court;

"And Mock hath lost her shoe."
v. 83.

22. not worth a leek] An expression not uncommon in our early
poetry:

No fellow worth ane leek."
G. Douglas's King Hart-Pinkerton's An. Scot. Poems from Maitl. MSS.
i. 42.

"Such love I price not at a leek."
Chaucer's Rom. of the Rose, fol. 130,-Works, ed. 1602.

23. Amend whan ye may,
For, usque ad montem Sare,
Men say ye can not appare] usque ad montem Sare, i.e. "even as far
as Mount Seir". Other eds. have fare for Sare; MS. has "sciire"
(perhaps Skelton wrote "Seir" and in the next line "appeire" The
meaning of this passage, is-Amend when ye may, for it is said by
every body, even as far as Mount Seir, that ye cannot be worse
than ye are. The Latin words are a quotation from the Vulgate: "Et
circuit de Baala contra occidentem, usque ad montem Seir." ("And
it compasseth from Baala westward unto mount Seir.") Josue, xv.
10.

24. hawk on hobby larks] i.e. catch larks (i.e. girls) like
hobbies, or hawks. See also notes 124 and 151 to Magnificence.

25. The gray gose for to shoe] Hoccleve uses this proverbial
expression;

"Ye meddle of all thing, ye mote shoe the goose."
Poems, p. 13. ed. 1796.

and Heywood has the following Epigram;

"Of common meddlers.

He that meddleth with all thing, may shoe the gosling.
If all such meddlers were set to goose shoeing,
No goose need go barefoot between this and Greece,
For so we should have as many goose shoers as geese."
Sig. P 2,-Works, ed. 1598.

See also Davies's Scourge of Folly (Proverbs), n. d. p. 175.

26. Your gorge not endewed
Without a capon &c.] Equivalent to-You not digesting any thing
except, &c. "She (the hawk) endueth when her meat in her bowels
falleth to digestion."-Book of St. Albans, by Juliana Berners,
sig. C. iii. "The gorge is that part of the hawk which first
receiveth the meat, and is called the Craw or Crop in other
fowls."-Latham's Falconry (Explan. of words of art,) 1658.

27. a stewed cock] Compare the following passage in the Interlude
of the iiii Elements, n. d.;

"Taverner. Though all capons be gone, what then?
Yet I can get you a stewed hen
That is ready dight.
Humanity. If she be fat it will do well.
Taverner. Fat or lean I cannot tell,
But as for this, I wot well
She lay at the stews all night."
Sig. B. vi.

28. To know what is o'clock
Under her surfled smock] Compare Heywood's Dialogue, &c.;

"Howbeit suddenly she minded on a day,
To pick the chest lock, wherein this bagge lay:
. . . .
But straight as she had forthwith opened the lock,
And looked in the bag, what it was o'clock," &c.
Sig. K 3,-Works, ed. 1598.

In our author's Garland of Laurel we find,

"With burrs rough and buttons surfling."
 v. 803.

which is cited (Dict. in v. Surfel) by Richardson, who, after
quoting from Gifford that "To surphule or surfel the cheeks, is to
wash them with mercurial or sulphur water," &c., adds that
Gifford's "explanation does not extend to the passage from
Skelton." The fact seems to be that Skelton uses surfle for
purfle, i.e. border, embroider: and I may notice that Brathwait,
on the other hand, seems to employ purfle for surfle;

"With painting, purfling, and a face of Art."
A Strappado for the Devil, 1615, p. 150.

29. And how when ye give orders
In your provincial borders,
As at Sitientes,
Some are insufficientes,
Some parum sapientes,
Some nihil intelligentes,
Some valde negligentes,
Some nullum sensum habentes,] Sitientes ("those who thirst") is
the first word of the Introit of the Mass for Passion Sunday -
"Sitientes, venite ad aquas, dicit Dominus," &c., ("All you that
thirst, come to the waters") Isaiah lv. 1. For this note I am
indebted to W. Dyce, Esq., who further observes that Sitientes
Saturday was of old, and is now abroad, the Saturday before
Passion Sunday.
insufficientes i.e. "defective"
parum sapientes i.e. "having little wisdom"
nihil intelligentes i.e. "no intelligence"
valde negligentes i.e. "very negligent"
nullum sensum habentes i.e. "having no sense"

30. But when they have once caught
Dominus vobiscum by the head] Dominus vobiscum i.e. "The Lord be
with you", a phrase from the Mass. The meaning of the two lines
is-"Once they have become priests."

31. run they in every stead] i.e. run they in every place.

32. primes and hours] i.e. the devotions so named

33. vagabundus] i.e. vagabonds.

34. Totus Mundus] "All the world"

35. Laetabundus] The Sequence from the Mass for Christmas Day.

36. welcome hake and make] An expression which I have not
elsewhere met with. Ray gives among North Country words, "To hake,
To sneak, or loiter:" in Hunter's Hallam. Gloss. is "A haking
fellow, an idle loiterer;" and in a song cited by Mr. J. P.
Collier (Hist. of Engl. Dram. Poet., ii. 472) from a MS. drama
called Misogonus by T. Richards, we find,-

"With Bess and Nell we love to dwell,
In kissing and in haking."

-make is common in the sense of-mate, companion

37. Cum ipsis vel illis
Qui manent in villis
Est uxor vel ancilla] "With those very people (i.e. bishops) who
live in villas is a wife or a maid."

38. Dominus vobiscum] "The Lord be with you"

39. Tom a thrum] See note 57 to Poems against Garnesche.

40 There shall no clergy appose
A mitre nor a crose,
But a full purse:]-clergy, i.e. erudition.

"Androgeus by king Mynos was sent,
For he should profit in clergy,
To Athens."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. i. leaf xii. ed. Wayland.

Appose seems to be used in a different sense from that in which we
have just had it (v. 267), and to be equivalent to-procure.

41. Over this, the foresaid lay] i.e besides this, the above-
mentioned laity.

42. To ride upon a mule
With gold all betrapped] Perhaps, as Warton thinks (note on Hist.
of E. P., ii. 347. ed. 4to), an allusion to Wolsey: afterwards in
this poem, the Cardinal appears to be pointed at more plainly.

43. purple and pall] An expression which frequently occurs, more
particularly in ballad poetry (considered by Percy and others as
equivalent to-purple robe):

44. Tabards] Jackets or coats, without sleeves, close before and
behind, and open at the sides, are still worn by heralds: but
those mentioned in the text were longer,-a sort of riding-cloaks.
"Tabard, a garment, manteau." Palsgrave, p. 278. And see Du
Cange's Gloss. in v. Tabartum: Roquefort's Gloss. in v. Tabar; and
Strutt's Dress and Habits, &c, ii. 301.

45. Their stirrups of mixed gold begared] The line, I suspect,
ought to stand,-

"Their stirrups with gold begared."

Begared-ornamented.

46. What care they though Gil sweat,
Or Jack of the Noke] So afterwards, v. 857, the same terms are
used to signify the labouring poor of both sexes. Jack of the
Noke, i.e. (I suppose) Jack of the Nook: see "Nocata terrae" in
Cowel's Law Dictionary, &c. ed. 1727.

47. Ware] MS "wasa".

48. Like princes aquilonis] i.e. like so many Lucifers.

49. For prests and for loans]-prests, i.e. sums in advance. "Prest
and loan," Sir H. Nicolas observes to me, "seem to have been used
in nearly, if not precisely, the same sense in the 16th century.
Perhaps, strictly, prest meant a compulsory advance. In fiscal
records it has much the meaning of charge or imprest."

50. Tenure par service de sottage,
And not par service de socage,] "held for being dolts and not as
payment for labour done." (PH)

51. Littleton Tenures] The Treatise on Tenures by Thomas de
Littleton, 1482, a standard textbook of the law of property in
England.

52. In secula seculorum] "For ever and ever"

53. vagabundare per forum] "To wander through the market-place."

54. And take a fine meritorum,
Contra regulam morum,
Aut black monachorum,
Aut canonicorum,
Aut Bernardinorum,
Aut crucifixorum] "To beg, or work for money, contrary to the rule
of the order, either of the black friars (Dominicans), or of the
(Augustinian) Canons, or of the Benedictines, or of the
Cistercians."

55. fuck-sails] So in a copy of verses attributed to Dunbar;

"The dust upscales, many fillock with fuck sails."
Poems, ii. 27. ed. Laing.

and in another by Sir R. Maitland;

"Of finest cambric their fuck sails."
Anc. Scot. Poems from Maitland MSS., ii. 326. ed. Pink.

Focksegel, a foresail, German. In the Expenses of Sir John Howard,
first Duke of Norfolk, we find, "Item, the same day my master paid
to the said Clayson, for a fuck mast for the said caravel, iijs.
iiijd." Manners and Household Expenses of England, &c., p.206. ed.
Roxb.

56. The lay fee people] i.e. the laity: see note 31 to A
Replication, &c.

57. titivils] This word occurs not unfrequently, and with some
variety of spelling, in our early writers. So Lydgate;

"Tytyvylles tyrants with tormentors."
Le Assemble de dyeus, sig. c i. n. d. 4to.

and Heywood;

"There is no mo such titifyls in England's ground,
To hold with the hare, and run with the hound."
Dialogue, &c. sig. C,-Works, ed. 1598.

Some have considered the word as derived from the Latin,
titivilitium, a thing of no worth. Jamieson "suspects that it is a
personal designation," Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang. in v.
Tutivillaris. In Juditium, Towneley Mysteries, p. 310, Tutivillus
is a fiend; and in the Moral Play of Mankind he represents the sin
of the flesh, Hist. of Eng. Dram. Poet., ii. 297, by Mr. J. P.
Collier, who says (ii. 223) that "the name afterwards came to mean
any person with evil propensities," and refers to the comedy of
Rauf Royster Doyster, Skelton's Works, and the Interlude of 
Thersytes: when he objected to the derivation of the word from
titivilitium and proposed "the more simple etymology, totus and
vilis," he was probably not aware that some writers (wrongly)
"totivillitium volunt, quasi totum vile:" ("use totivillitium
instead of totum vile")-see Gronovius's note on the Casina of
Plautus, ii. 5, 39. ed. Var.

58. Of an abbey ye make a grange] A proverbial expression.

"Our changes are such that an abbey turneth to a grange."
Bale's King John, p. 23. Camd. ed.

"To bring an Abbey to a Grange." Ray's Proverbs, p. 174. ed. 1768.

59. in deliciis,
In gloria et divitiis,
In admirabili honore,
In gloria et splendore
Fulgurantis hastae,
Viventes parum caste:] "in luxury, in glory and riches, in amazing
state, in glory and the brightness of a glittering spear, living
unchastely." splendore Fulgurantis hastae - From the Vulgate.
"Ibunt in splendore fulgurantis hastae tuae." ("They shall go in
the brightness of thy glittering spear") Habac. iii. 11. "Et
micantis gladii, et fulgurantis hastae." ("And of the shining
sword, and of the glittering spear") Nahum, iii. 3.

60. Gloria, laus] "Glory, praise."

61. Hippocras] Was a favourite medicated drink, composed of wine
(usually red), with spices and sugar. It is generally supposed to
have been so named from Hippocrates; perhaps because it was
strained,-the woollen bag used by apothecaries to strain syrups
and decoctions for clarification being termed Hippocrates's
sleeve.

62. Let the cat wink] See note 41 to The Tunning of Elynour
Rumming.

63. per assimile] "Similarly"

64. In Ariete] in the astrological house of Aries.

65. Ascendant a degree] This passage seems to be corrupted. MS.
"Assendente a dextre:" (and compare the Lansdown MS quoted below,
note 65.)

66 A fatal fall of one] Here Skelton seems to allude to Wolsey;
and from these lines (called in the Lansdown MS., "The prophecy of
Skelton" perhaps originated the story of our poet having
prophesied the downfall of the Cardinal.

67. And let Colyn Cloute have none] MS. has "alone;" and omits the
seventy-eight lines which follow. Among the Lansdown MSS. (762.
Fol. 75) I find the subjoined fragment:

Some men think that ye
Shall have penalty
For your iniquity
Note well what to say
If it please thee not only
It is good for astrology
For Ptolemy told me
The sun sometime to be
In a sign called Ariotte [i.e. Aries]
Assendam ad dextram ["rising in the east"]
When Scorpio is descending
Effectual fall of one [i.e Wolsey]
That sits now on throne
And rules all thing alone.
Your teeth whet on this bone
Among you everichon
And let Colyn Cloute alone
The Prophecy of Skelton*
1529
(*The name originally written "Skylton.")

68. foretop] i.e. (as the context shows) simply,-head, pate.

69. But their malignities] Qy. by their malignities?

70. And some have a smack
Of Luther's sack] Concerning the wine called sack (about which so
much has been written) see Henderson's Hist. of Anc. and Mod.
Wines, p. 298.

71. Called Wicliffista] Followers of John Wycliffe.

72. Hussians] i.e. Hussites, followers of Jan Huss.

73. How the Church hath too mickle &c.] This passage in MS. stands
thus:

"Some say holy church have too mickle
Some say the have trialities
And some say they bring pluralities
And qualify qualities
and also tot-quot
They talk like sots
Making many outcries
That they cannot keep their wives
and thus the losels strives."

74. tot-quot] A tot-quot is a dispensation to hold any number of
benefices. So Barclay;

"Then if this lord have in him favour, he hath hope
To have another benefice of greater dignity,
And so maketh a false suggestion to the pope
For a tot-quot, or else a plurality."
Ship of Fools, fol. 60. ed. 1570.

75. dykes] i.e. ditches.

"Where the blind leadeth the blind, both fall in the dyke."
Heywood's Dialogue, &c.-Works, ed. 1598, sig. G 2.

76. De Terra] "Of the land of"

77. Many one ye have untwined] The reading of the MS., which at
least gives a sense to the line; untwined, i.e. destroyed; see
note 27 to Philip Sparrow.

78. qui se existimat stare] "Who thinketh he standeth" (1 Cor. x.
12)

79. in the devil way] A common expression in our early writers.

"Our Host answerd; Tell on a devil way."
Chaucer's Miller's Prol., v. 3136. ed. Tyr.

"In the twenty devil way, Au nom du grant diable." Palsgrave, p.
838. "What reason is that, in the twenty devil way, that he should
bear such a rule? Quaenam (malum) ratio est," &c. Hormanni
Vulgaria, sig. dd iii. ed. 1530.

80. aures patentes] "open ears"

81. parum intendentes] "Too little hearing"

82. Adulator] "Sycophant"

83. Assentator] "Yes-man"

84. Blandior blandiris] "I flatter, you flatter"

85. Mentior mentiris] "I lie, you lie"

86. Ye bishops of estates]-of estates, i.e. of great estate, rank,
dignity.

87. The Church's high estates] i.e. the dignitaries of the Church.

88. res certa] A certain fact.

89. of the order
Upon Greenwich border,
Called Observance] The statement that Edward the Third founded a
religious house at Greenwich in 1376 appears to rest on no
authority. A grant of Edward the Fourth to certain Minorites or
Observant Friars of the order of St. Francis of a piece of ground
which adjoined the palace at Greenwich, and on which they had
begun to build several small mansions, was confirmed in 1486 by a
charter of Henry the Seventh, who founded there a convent of
friars of that order, to consist of a warden and twelve brethren
at the least; and who is said to have afterwards rebuilt their
convent from the foundation. The friars of Greenwich were much
favoured by Katherine, Queen of Henry the Eighth; and when, during
the question of her divorce, they had openly espoused her cause,
the king was so greatly enraged that he suppressed the whole order
through out England. The convent at Greenwich was dissolved in
1534. Queen Mary reinstated them in their possessions, and new-
founded and repaired their monastery. Queen Elizabeth suppressed
them, &c. See Lysons's Environs of London, iv. 464. ed. 1796.

90. Babwell beside Bury] When by an order of Pope Urban the
Fourth, the Grey Friars were removed out of the town and
jurisdiction of Bury St. Edmund, in 1263, "they retired to a place
just without the bounds, beyond the north gate, called Babwell,
now the Toll-gate, which the abbot and convent generously gave
them to build on; and here, they continued till the dissolution." 
Tanner's Not. Mon. p. 527. ed. 1744.

91) To postil upon a Kyrie] i.e. to comment upon a Kyrie eleison
("Lord, have mercy", a prayer in the Mass) A postil is a short
gloss or note.

92. And make a Welshman's hose
Of the text and of the glose] So again our author in his Garland
of Laurel;

"And after conveyance as the world goes,
It is no folly to use the Welshman's hose."
v. 1238.

Compare The Legend of the Bishop of St. Andrew's;

"Of omnigatherene now his glose,
He made it like a Welshman's hose."
Scot. Poems of the Sixteenth Century, (by Dalzell), p. 332.

"WELSHMAN'S HOSE. Equivalent, I imagine, to the breeches of a
Highlander, or the dress of a naked Pict; upon the presumption
that Welshmen had no hose." Nares's Gloss. in v. Unfortunately,
however, for this ingenious conjecture, the expression is found
varied to "shipman's hose,"-which certainly cannot be considered
as a non-entity. "Hereunto they add also a Similitude not very
agreeable, how the Scriptures be like to a Nose of Wax, or a
Shipman's Hose: how they may be fashioned, and plied all manner of
ways, and serve all men's turn's." Jewel's Defence of the Apology,
&c. p. 465. ed. 1567. "And not made as a shipman's hose to serve
for every leg." Wilson's Art of Rhetorick, p. 102. ed. 1580.
Surely Welshman's hose (as well as shipman's) became proverbial
from their pliability, power of being stretched, &c.

93. Parum litteratus,
Dominus doctoratus] "Professor with a doctorate, little literate."

94. the Broad Gatus] Means, perhaps, Broadgates Hall, Oxford, on
the site of which Pembroke College was erected.

95. Dawpatus] i.e. Simple-pate: see note 25 to The Bowge of Court.

96. Drunken as a mouse] So Chaucer;

"We faren as he that drunk is as a mouse."
The Knight's Tale, v. 1263. ed. Tyr.

97. his pillion and his cap] pillion, from Lat. Pileus ("A
brimless felt hat or cap"). "Hic pilleus est ornamentum capitis
sacerdotis vel graduati, Anglice a hure or a pillion." ("This
pilleus is an ornamental headdress of priests and graduates,
called in English a hure or pillion.") Halliwell, Dict. Compare
Barclay;

"Mercury shall give thee gifts manifold,
His pillion, scepter, his wings, and his harp."
Fourth Egloge, sig. C iiii. ed. 1570.

98. As wise as Waltham's calf] So Heywood;

"And think me as wise as Walthams calf, to talk," &c.
Dialogue, &c. sig. F 3,-Works, ed. 1598.

Ray gives, "As wise as Waltham's calf, that ran nine miles to suck
a bull." Proverbs, p. 220. ed. 1768.

99. a God's half] i.e. for God's sake. See note 64 to The Tunning
of Elynour Rumming.

100. syllogisare] "Argue by syllogism"

101. enthymemare] "Construct an enthymeme (i.e. A rhetorical and
impressive (but perhaps dubious) argument)

102. Semper protestando
De non impugnando] "Always protesting about not attacking"

103. Flattering, &c.] Compare Barclay;

We give wool and cheese, our wives coin and eggs,
When friars flatter and praise their proper legs."
Fifth Egloge, sig. D v. ed. 1570.

104. their tongues file]-file, i.e. smooth, polish: the expression
occurs in earlier and in much later writers.

105. To Margery and to Maud,
How they have no fraud] As we find the name "Mawte" in our
author's Elynour Rumming, v. 159 , and as in the second of these
lines the MS. has "fawte "(i.e. fault), the right reading is
probably,

"To Margery and to Maud,
How they have no fault

106. Jill and Jack at Noke] See note 46 above.

107. Some walk about in melottes] "Circuierunt in melotis."
Vulgate,-Heb. xi. 37. "Melotes," as Mr. Albert Way observes to me,
"is explained in the Catholicon to be a garment used by the monks
during laborious occupation, made of the skin of the badger, and
reaching from the neck to the loins," and according to other early
dictionaries, it was made of the hair or skin of other animals. So
the original Greek word, µ???t?, which properly means pellis ovina
("sheep-skin"), signifies also pellis quaevis ("any kind of
skin").

108. in remotes] i.e. in retired places.

109. Sed libera nos a malo] "but deliver us from evil"-from the
Lord's Prayer

110. And by Dudum, their Clementine,
Against curates they repine;
And say properly they are sacerdotes,
To shrive, assoile, and release
Dame Margery's soul out of hell] sacerdotes, i.e. priests. "On a
de Clement V une compilation nouvelle, tant des décrets du concile
général de Vienne, que de ses épîtres ou constitutions. C'est ce
qu'on appelle les Clementines." ("Clement V made a new compilation
of the decrees of the Council of Vienne together with his letters
and rulings on the subject. This is what is called the
Clementines.") L'Art de verifier les Dates, &c. (depuis la
naissance de Notre-seigneur), iii. 382. ed. 1818. Skelton alludes
here to Clement. lib. iii. tit. vii. cap. ii. which begins," Dudum
à Bonifacio Papa octavo proedecessore nostro," &c., and contains
the following passages. "Ab olim siquidem inter Praelatos &
Rectores, seu Sacerdotes ac Clericos parochialium Bcclesiarum per
diversas Mundi provincias constitutos ex una parte, &
Praedicatorum & Minorum ordinum fratres ex altera (pacis aemulo,
satore zizania procurante), gravis & periculosa discordia extitit,
suscitata super praedicationibus fidelium populis faciendis, eorum
confessionibus audiendis, penitentiis iniungendis eisdem, &
tumulandis defunctorum corporibus, qui apud fratrum ipsorum
Ecclesias sive loca noscuntur eligere sepulturam
. . . .
Statuimus etiam & ordinamus auctoritate praedicta, ut in singulis
civitatibus & diocesibus, in quibus loca fratrum ipsorum
consistere dignoscuntur, vel in civitatibus & diocesibus locis
ipsis vicinis, in quibus loca huiusmodi non habentur, Magistri,
Priores provinciales Praedicatorum, aut eorum Vicarii & Generales,
et Provinciales Ministri & custodes Minorum & ordinum dictorum ad
praesentiam Praelatorum eorundem locorum se conferant per se, vel
per fratres, quos ad hoc idoneos fore putaverint, humiliter
petituri, ut fratres, qui ad hoc electi fuerint, in eorum
civitatibus & diocesibus confessiones subditorum suorum confiteri
sibi volentium audire libere valeant, & huiusmodi confitentibus
(prout secundam Deum expedire cognoverint) penitentias imponere
salutares, atque eisdem absolutionis beneficium impendere de
licentia, gratia, & beneplacito eorundem: Ac deinde praefati
Magistri, Priores, Provinciales, & Ministri ordinum praedictorum
eligere studeant personas sufficientes, idoneas, vita probatas,
discretas, modestas, atque peritas, ad tam salubre min isterium et
officiurn exequendum: quas sic ab ipsis electas repraesentent, vel
faciant praesentari Praelatis, ut de eorum licentia, gratia, &
beneplacito in civitatibus & diocesibus eorundem huiusmodi
personae sic electae confessiones confiteri sibi volentium
audiant, imponant penitentias salutares, & beneficium absolutionis
(in posterum) impendant, prout superius est expressum: extra
civitates & dioceses, in quibus fuerint deputatae, per quas eas
volumus & non per provincias deputari, confessiones nullatenus
auditurae. Numerus autem personarum assumendarum ad huiusmodi
officium exercendum esse debet, prout universitas cleri & populi,
ac multitudo vel paucitas exigit eorundem. Et si iidem Praelati
petitam licentiam confessionum huius modi audiendarum
concesserint: illam praefati Magistri, Ministri, & alii cum
gratiarum recipiant actione, dictaeque personae sic electae
commissum sibi officium exequantur. Quod si forte iam dicti
Praelati quenquam ex dictis fratribus prasentatis eisdem ad
huiusmodi officium nollent habere, vel non ducerent admittendum:
eo amoto, vel subtracto loco ipsius similiter eisdem prasentandus
Praelatis possit, & debeat alius surrogari. Si vero iidem Praelati
praefatis fratribus ad confessiones (ut praemittitur) audiendas
electis, huius modi exhibere licentiam recusarint, nos ex nunc
ipsis, ut confessiones sibi confiteri volentium libere liciteque
audire valeant, & eisdem penitentias imponere salutares, atque
eisdem beneficium absolutionis impertiri, gratiose concedimus de
plenitudine Apostolica potestatis. Per huiusmodi autem
concessionem nequaquam intendimus personis, seu fratribus ipsis ad
id taliter deputatis, potestatem in hoc impendere ampliorem quam
in eo curatis vel parochialibus Sacerdotibus est a iure concessa:
nisi forsan eis Ecclesiarum Praelati uberiorem in hac parte
gratiam specialiter ducerent faciendam." Pp. 184-190. (Decret.
tom. iii. ed. 1600.)

111. But when the friar fell in the well,
He could not sing himself thereout
But by the help of Christian Clout] The name "Christian Clout" has
occurred before in our author's Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale, v.
6. The story alluded to in this passage appears to be nearly the
same as that which is related in a comparatively modern ballad,
entitled,

"The Friar Well fitted: or, A Pretty Jest that once befel,
How a Maid put a Friar to cool in the Well.
To a merry new Tune. Licens'd and Enter'd according to Order."

The Friar wishes to seduce the Maid;

"But she denied his Desire,
And told him, that she feared Hell-fire;
fa, la, &c.
Tush, (quoth the Friar) thou needst not doubt,
fa, la, &c.
If thou wert in Hell, I could sing thee out;
fa, la, &c.

The Maid then tells him that he "shall have his request," but only
on condition that be brings her "an angel of money." While he is
absent, "She hung a Cloth before the Well;" and, when he has
returned, and given her the angel,-

"Oh stay, (quoth she) some Respite make,
My Father comes, he will me take;
fa, la, &c.
Alas, (quoth the Friar) where shall I run,
fa, la, &c.
To hide me till that he be gone?
fa, la, &c.
Behind the Cloth run thou (quoth she),
And there my Father cannot thee see;
fa, la, &c.
Behind the Cloth the Friar crept,
fa, la, &c.
And into the Well on sudden he leapt,
fa, la, &c.
Alas, (quoth he) I am in the Well;
No matter, (quoth she) if thou wert in Hell;
fa, la, &c.
Thou say'st thou could'st sing me out of Hell,
fa, la, &c.
Now prithee sing thyself out of the Well,
fa, la, &c."

The Maid at last helps him out, and bids him be gone; but when he
asks her to give him back the angel,-

"Good Sir, (said she) there's no such matter,
I'll make you pay for fouling my Water;
fa, la, &c.
The Friar went along the Street,
fa, la, &c.
Dripping wet, like a new-wash'd Sheep,
fa, la, &c.
Both Old and Young commended the Maid,
That such a witty Prank had played;
fa, la, la, la, la,
fa, la, la, lang-tree down-dilly."
Ballads, Brit. Mus. 643. m.

112. Another Clementine also,
How friar Fabian, with other mo,
Exivit de Paradiso;] Exivit de Paradiso - "Went out from
Paradise". I suspect some corruption here. In MS. the passage
stands thus;

"Another Clementine how friar faby and mo
Exivit," &c.

There seems to be an allusion to Clement. lib. v. tit. xi. cap.
i., which begins, "Exivi de paradiso, dixi, rigabo hortum
plantationum, ait ille coelestis agricola," ("'I came out from
paradise,' he said; 'I will water the plants in the garden,' said
that heavenly farmer.") &c. p. 313. (Decret. tom. iii. ed. 1600).

113. De hoc petimus consilium] "Of this we seek counsel."

114. Dirige and Placebo] The first words respectively of the
Matins and Vespers services for the dead.

115. play silence and glum
Can say nothing but mum.] See note 9 above.

116. paints] i.e. feigns. See note 70 to The Tunning of Elynour
Rumming.

117. cross] i.e. coin. See note 40 to The Bowge of Court.

118. palls] See note 43 above

119. Arras] i.e. tapestry: see note 75 to Poems Against Garnesche.

120. tirly tirlow] This passage was strangely misunderstood by the
late Mr. Douce, who thought that "tirly tirlow" alluded to the
note of the crow, that bird being mentioned in the preceding line!
Illust. of Shakespeare, i. 353. The expression has occurred
before, in our author's Elynour Rumming, v. 292; here it is
equivalent to the modern fa, la, la, which is often used with a
sly or wanton allusion,-as, for instance, at the end of each
stanza of Pope's court-ballad, The Challenge.

121. a lege de moy] See note 71 to The Tunning of Elynour Rumming.


122. With such stories bedene]-bedene, that is, "by the dozen,"
says Warton, erroneously, quoting this passage, Hist. of E. P.,
ii. 343. ed. 4to (note). The word occurs frequently in our early
poetry, with different significations: here it may be explained-
together-(with a collection of such stories); so in The World and
the Child, 1522;

"Now Christ . . .
Save all this company that is gathered here bedene."
Sig. C iiii.

123. Their chambers well beseen]-well beseen, i.e. of a good
appearance,-well-furnished, or adorned.

124. Now all the world stares, &c.] "This is still," as Warton
observes (Hist. of E. P., ii. 343. ed. 4to, note), "a description
of tapestry."

125. estate] i.e. high rank, dignity.

126. Their chambers thus to dress
With such parfitness]-parfitness, i.e. perfectness. "We should
observe," says Warton, after citing the passage, "that the satire
is here pointed at the subject of these tapestries. The graver
ecclesiastics, who did not follow the levities of the world, were
contented with religious subjects, or such as were merely
historical." Hist. of E. P., ii. 344. ed. 4to.

127. For one man to rule a king] An allusion, I apprehend, to
Wolsey's influence over Henry the Eighth: so again our author
speaking of Wolsey, in some Latin lines at the end of Why Come ye
not to Court, "Qui regnum regemque regit." ("Who rules the realm
and the king") (Not in this edition). I may observe too, in
further confirmation of the reading "King" instead of "ging"
[Kele's ed.], that we have had, in an earlier passage of the
present poem,

"To rule both king and kayser."
v. 606.

128. Cum regibus amicare,
Et omnibus dominari,
Et supra te pravare.] "To be friendly with kings, and to rule all
things, and to tyrannise." "Amico, to befriend." Medulla
Gramatice, MS. (now in the possession of Mr. Rodd.). Pravare-In
Ortus Vocab. fol. ed. W. de Worde, n. d., is "Pravo . . . pravum
facere, or to shrew," and "Tirannus. shrew or tyrant." The meaning
therefore of pravare in our text may be-to play the tyrant.

129. eure] "Eur, hap or luck, with his compounds bonheur and
malheur," &c. Palsgrave, p. 166.

"My goddess bright, my fortune, and my eure."
Chaucer's Court of Loue, fol. 330, Works, ed. 1602.

"The grace and eure and hap of old fortune."
Lydgate's Wars of Troy, B. iv. sig. Z v. ed. 1555.

"But wait his death & his fatal eure."
Id. sig. A a i.

"And fortune which hath the such eure y-sent."
Poems by C. Duke of Orleans,-MS. Harl. 682. fol. 24.

130. played so checkmate] In allusion to the king's being put in
cheek at the game of chess.

131. at the pleasure of one, &c.] Meaning, surely, Wolsey.

132. not so hardy on his head] An elliptical expression; compare
"Not so hardy on their pates!" v. 1154. In the Morte d'Arthur when
Bors is on the point of slaying King Arthur, "Not so hardy, said
Sir Launcelot, upon pain of thy head, &c." B. xx. c. xiii. vol.
ii. 411. ed. Southey.

133. To look on God in form of bread] A not unfrequent expression
in our early writers.

"When I sacred our Lord's body,
Christ Jesu in form of bread."
The Life of Saint Gregory's Mother, n. d. sig. A v.

See too Ritson's An. Pop. Poetry, p. 84; and Hartshorne's An. Met.
Tales, p. 134.

134. this] Perhaps for-thus; Skelton, elsewhere, like many of our
old poets, uses this for thus; as in Ware the Hawk;

Where Christ's precious blood
Daily offered is,
To be polluted this"
v. 179

135. debetis scire] "You ought to know."

136. audire] "To hear."

137. convenire] "To confer together."

138. mooting] "Certamen . . . anglice flyting chiding or mooting."
Ortus Vocab. fol. ed. IV. de Worde, n. d.

139. to be gramed] i.e. to be angered: gramed is doubtless the
right reading here, though the eds. have "greued" and the MS.
"grevyd"-(grame has already occurred in Magnificence, v. 1864.

140. Not so hardy on their pates] See note 132 above.

141. Sir Guy of Gaunt] See note 81 to Philip Sparrow

142. doctor Deuce-ace] See note 12 to Against a Comely Custron

143. Saint Mary Spital] In Bishopsgate Ward: see Stow's Survey, B.
ii. 97. ed. 1720.

144. set not by us a whistle] i.e. value us not at a whistle, care
not a whistle for us. Compare Lydgate;

"For he set not by his wrath a whistle."
The prohemy of a marriage, &c.,-MS. Harl. 372. fol. 45.

145. the Austin friars] In Broad-street Ward: see Stow's Survey,
B. ii. 114. ed. 1720.

146. Saint Thomas of Acre's] Concerning the Hospital intituled of
"S. Thomas of Acon or Acars [Acre in the Holy Land], near to the
great Conduit in Cheap," see Stow's Survey, B. iii. 37. ed. 1720,
and Maitland's Hist. of London, ii. 886. ed. 1756.

147. reason or skill] See note 14 to Magnificence.

148. the right of a ram's horn] An expression which our author has
again in Speak, Parrot, v. 498. So in a metrical fragment, temp.
Edward ii.;

"As right as ram's horn."
Reliquae Antiquae (by Wright and Halliwell), ii. 19.

And Lydgate has a copy of verses, the burden of which is,

"Conveyed by line right as a ram's horn."
MS. Harl. 172. fol. 71.

See too Ray's Proverbs, p. 225. ed. 1768.

149. Isaias] According to a Jewish tradition, Isaiah was cut in
two with a wooden saw by order of King Manasseh.

150. cough, rough, or snivel]-rough, i.e., perhaps, rout, snore,
snort. I may just observe that Palsgrave not only gives "rowte" in
that sense, but also "I Rowte, I belch as one doth that voideth
wind out of his stomach, Je roucte," (p. 695.) and that Coles has
"To rout, Crepo, pedo." (to belch, fart") Dict.

151. set not a nut-shell] i.e. value not at a nut-shell, care not
a nut-shell for.

152. said sayne] A sort of pleonastic expression,-equivalent to-
called commonly or proverbially. See also in v. 864 "an old said
saw".

153. great estates] i.e. persons of great estate, or rank.

154. far] i.e. farther:

"I will no far mell."
Gentleness and Nobility, n. d. (attributed without grounds to
Heywood) sig C.

155. the porte salu] i.e. the safe port. Skelton has the term
again in his Garland of Laurel, v. 541. Compare Hoccleve;

"whether our taill
Shall soon make us with our ships sail
To port salu." Poems, p. 61. ed. 1796,-

where the editor observes, "Port salut was a kind of proverbial
expression, and so used in the translation of Cicero de senectute
printed by Caxton." He continues, "but the ships, which were to be
procured by their taill (or exchequer tally) to carry them to this
safe port, were probably nobles (which had a ship for the
reverse)"

156. In opere imperfecto,
In opere semper perfecto,
Et in opere plusquam perfecto] "In an imperfect work, in a work
always perfect, and in a work more than perfect." (PH)

157. Colinus Cloutus &c.] "Colyn Cloute, though many of my songs .
. . [second and third lines unintelligible (but see below)] Whence
it concerns me so much the less, although the envious tongue
prepares to hurt, because, although I sing of rustic things, yet I
shall be sung about on all sides, and everywhere shall be
celebrated, so long as the glorious nglish race remains. The
laurel of honour, once the queen of possessions and the glory of
kings, alas! now decays and rots and grows languid and torpid! Ah,
the shame! ah, the pity! Here I am forbidden, for groaning and
tears, to speak more. I pray the rewards may exceed the
punishment." (PH)

These verses, not in eds., follow the poem of Colyn Cloute in the
Harleian MS. The corruptions in the second and third lines
(distinguished by Roman letter) have baffled the ingenuity of the
several scholars to whom I submitted them.

A reviewer in the Gentleman's Magazine (Sept. 1844, p.246,) would
cure this corrupted passage as follows:

Colinus Cloutus, quanquam mea carmina multis
Sordescunt stultus, sed paucis sunt data cultis,
Paucis ante alios divino flamine flatis.
("Colyn Cloute, though many of my songs seem filthy to fools, it
is given however to a few cultivated persons, to tell the few
inspired words from the farts")



THE GARLAND OF LAUREL

[From Fauke's ed. 1523, collated with Marshe's ed. of Skelton's
Works, 1568, (in which it is entitled The Crown of Laurel,) and
with fragments of the poem among the Cottonian MSS. Vit. E.X. fol.
200. The prefaratory Latin lines are from Fauke's ed., where they
are given on the back of the title page, and below a woodcut
portrait headed "Skelton Poeta,": they are not in Marshe's ed. nor
in MS.]

A RIGHT DELECTABLE TREATISE UPON A GOODLY
GARLAND OR CHAPLET OF LAUREL

BY MASTER SKELTON, POET LAUREATE, STUDIOUSLY DEVISED AT SHERIFF-
HUTTON CASTLE<1>, IN THE FOREST OF GALTRES, WHEREIN ARE COMPRISED
MANY AND DIVERS SOLACIOUS AND RIGHT PREGNANT ELECTUARIES OF
SINGULAR PLEASURE, AS MORE AT LARGE IT DOTH APPEAR IN THE PROCESS
FOLLOWING.

Eterno mansura die dum sidera fulgent,
Aequora dumque tument, haec laurea nostra virebit:
Hinc nostrum celebre et nomen referetur ad astra,
Undique Skeltonis memorabitur alter Adonis.<2>

Arrecting my sight toward the zodiac,
The signs xii for to behold afar,
When Mars retrogradant reversed his back,
Lord of the year in his orbicular,
Put up his sword, for he could make no war,
And when Lucina plenarly did shine,
Scorpio ascending degrees twice nine;

In place alone then musing in my thought
How all thing passeth as doth the summer flower,
On every half my reasons forth I sought,                       10
How often fortune varieth in an hour,
Now clear weather, forthwith a stormy shower;
All thing compassed, no perpetuity,
But now in wealth, now in adversity.

So deeply drowned I was in this dump,
Encrampished<3> so sore was my conceit,
That, me to rest, I leant me to a stump
Of an oak, that sometime grew full straight,
A mighty tree and of a noble height,
Whose beauty blasted was with the boisterous wind,             20
His leaves lost, the sap was from the rind.

Thus stood I in the frithy forest of Galtres,
Ensoaked with silt of the miry moss,<4>
Where harts bellowing,<5> embossed with distress,
Ran on the range so long, that I suppose
Few men can tell now where the hind-calf<6> goes;
Fair fall that forester that so well can bate his hound!
But of my purpose now turn we to the ground.

Whiles I stood musing in this meditation,
In slumbering I fell and half in a sleep;                      30
And whether it were of imagination,
Or of humours superflue,<7> that often will creep
Into the brain by drinking over-deep,
Or it proceeded of fatal persuasion,
I cannot well tell you what was the occasion;

But suddenly at once, as I me advised,
As one in a trance or in an ecstasy,
I saw a pavilion wondrously disguised,<8>
Garnished fresh after my fantasy,
Enhatched with pearl and stones preciously,<9>                 40
The ground engrosed and bet with bourne gold,<10>
That passing goodly it was to behold:

Within it, a princess excellent of port;
But to recount her rich habiliment,
And what estates to her did resort,
Thereto am I full insufficient;
A goddess immortal she did represent;
As I heard say, dame Pallas was her name;
To whom supplied the royal Queen of Fame.<11>

The QUEEN OF FAME to DAME PALLAS

Princess most puissant, of high pre-eminence,                  50
Renowned lady above the starry heaven,
All other transcending, of very congruence<12>
Madam regent of the science seven,
To whose estate all nobleness must leanen,
My supplication to you I arrect,
Whereof I beseech you to tender the effect.

Not unremembered it is unto your grace
How you gave me a royal commandement
That in my court Skelton should have a place,
Because that his time he studiously hath spent
In your service; and, to the accomplishment                    60
Of your requests, registered in his name
With laureate triumph in the court of Fame.

But, good madam, the accustom and usage
Of ancient poets, ye wot full well, hath been
Themself to embusy with all their whole courage,
So that their works might famously be seen,
In figure whereof they wear the laurel green;
But how it is, Skelton is wonder slack,
And, as we dare, we find in him great lack.                    70

For, ne were only he hath your promotion,
Out of my books full soon I should him rase;
But sith he hath tasted of the sugared potion
Of Helicon's well, refreshed with your grace,
And will not endeavour himself to purchase
The favour of ladies with words elect,
It is sitting that ye must him correct.

DAME PALLAS to the QUEEN OF FAME

The sum of your purpose, as we are advised,
Is that our servant is somewhat too dull;
Wherein this answer for him we have comprised,<13>             80
How rivers run not till the spring be full;
Better a dumb mouth than a brainless skull;
For if he gloriously polish his matter,
Then men will say how he doth but flatter;

And if so him fortune to write true and plain,
As sometime he must vices remord,
Then some will say he hath but little brain,
And how his words with reason will not accord;
Beware, for writing remaineth of record;
Displease not an hundred for one man's pleasure;               90
Who writeth wisely hath a great treasure.

Also, to furnish better his excuse,
Ovid was banished for such a skill,
And many more whom I could induce;
Juvenal was threat, pardie, for to kill<14>
For certain invectives, yet wrote he none ill,
Saving he rubbed some upon the gall;
It was not for him to abide the trial.

In general words, I say not greatly nay,
A poet sometime may for his pleasure taunt,                   100
Speaking in parables, how the fox, the grey,<15>
The gander, the goose, and the huge elephant,
Went with the peacock again the pheasant;
The lizard came leaping, and said that he must,
With help of the ram, lay all in the dust.

Yet divers there be, industrious of reason,
Somewhat would gather in their conjecture
Of such an endarked chapter some season;
Howbeit, it were hard to construe this lecture;
Sophisticated craftily is many a confecture;                  110
Another man's mind diffuse is to expound;<16>
Yet hard is to make but some fault be found.

The QUEEN OF FAME to DAME PALLAS

Madam, with favour of your benign sufferance,
Unto your grace then make I this motive;<17>
Whereto made ye me him to advance
Unto the room of laureate promotive?
Or whereto should he have that prerogative,
But if he had made some memorial
Whereby he might have a name immortal?

To pass the time in slothful idleness,                        120
Of your royal palace it is not the guise,
But to do somewhat each man doth him dress:
For how should Cato else be called wise,
But that his books, which he did devise,
Record the same? or why is had in mind
Plato, but for that he left writing behind,

For men to look on? Aristotle also,
Of philosophers called the principal,
Old Diogenes, with many other mo,
Demosthenes, that orator royal,                               130
That gave Aeschines<18> such a cordial,
That banished was he by his proposition,
Against whom he could make no contradiction?

DAME PALLAS to the QUEEN OF FAME

Soft, my good sister, and make there a pause.
And was Aeschines rebuked as ye say?
Remember you well, point well that clause;
Wherefore then rased ye not away
His name? or why is it, I you pray,
That he to your court is going and coming,                    140
Sith he is slandered for default of conning?

The QUEEN OF FAME to DAME PALLAS

Madame, your apposal<19> is well inferred,
And at your advantage quickly it is
Touched,<20> and hard for to be debarred;<21>
Yet shall I answer your grace as in this,
With your reformation, if I say amiss,
For, but if your bounty did me assure,
Mine argument else could not long endure.

As touching that Aeschines is remembered,
That he so should be, me seemeth it sitting,
Albeit great part he hath surrendered                         150
Of his honour, whose dissuasive in writing
To courage Demosthenes was much exciting,
In setting out freshly<22> his crafty persuasion,
From which Aeschines had none evasion.

The cause why Demosthenes so famously is bruited
Only proceeded for that he did outray<23>
Aeschines, which was not shamefully confuted
But of that famous orator, I say,
Which passed all other; wherefore I may
Among my records suffer him named,                            160
For though he were vanquished, yet was he not shamed:

As Jerome, in his preamble Frater Ambrosius,<24>
From that I have said in no point doth vary,
Wherein he reporteth of the courageous
Words that were much consolatory
By Aeschines rehearsed to the great glory
Of Demosthenes, that was his utter foe:
Few shall ye find or none that will do so.

DAME PALLAS to the QUEEN OF FAME

A thank to have, ye have well deserved,
Your mind that can maintain so apparently;                    170
But a great part yet ye have reserved
Of that must follow then consequently,
Or else ye demean you inordinately;
For if ye laud him whom honour hath opprest,
Then he that doth worst is as good as the best.

But whom that ye favour, I see well, hath a name,
Be he never so little of substance,
And whom ye love not ye will put to shame;
Ye counterweigh not evenly your balance;
As well folly as wisdom oft ye do advance:                    180
For report riseth many diverse ways.
Some be much spoken of for making of frays;

Some have a name for theft and bribery;
Some be called crafty that can pick a purse;
Some men be made of for their mockery;
Some careful cuckolds, some have their wives curse;
Some famous wittols, and they be much worse;
Some lidderons, some losels, some naughty packs;
Some facers, some bracers, some make great cracks;<25>

Some drunken dastards with their dry souls;                   190
Some sluggish slovens, that sleep day and night;
Riot and Revel be in your court-rolls;<26>
Maintenance and Mischief, these be men of might;
Extortion is counted with you for a knight;
These people by me have none assignment,
Yet they ride and run from Carlisle to Kent.

But little or nothing ye shall hear tell
Of them that have virtue by reason of conning,
Which sovereignly in honour should excel;
Men of such matters make but a mumming,<27>                   200
For wisdom and sadness be set out a-sunning;
And such of my servants as I have promoted,
One fault or other in them shall be noted.

Either they will say he is too wise,
Or else he can nought but when he is at school;
Prove his wit, sayeth he, at cards or dice,
And ye shall well find he is a very fool;
Twish, set him a chair, or reach him a stool,
To sit him upon, and read Jack-a-Thrum's bible,<28>
For truly it were pity that he sat idle.                      210

The QUEEN OF FAME to DAME PALLAS

To make repugnance against that ye have said
Of very duty it may not well accord,
But your benign sufferance for my discharge I laid,
For that I would not with you fall at discord;
But yet I beseech your grace that good record
May be brought forth, such as can be found,
With laureate triumph why Skelton should be crowned;

For else it were too great a derogation
Unto your palace, our noble court of Fame,
That any man under supportation                               220
Without deserving should have the best game:
If he to the ample increase of his name
Can lay any works that he hath compiled,
I am content that he be not exiled

From the laureate senate by force of proscription;
Or else, ye know well, I can do no less
But I must banish him from my jurisdiction,
As he hath acquainted him with idleness;
But if that he purpose to make a redress,
What he hath done, let it be brought to sight;                230
Grant my petition, I ask you but right.

DAME PALLAS to the QUEEN OF FAME

To your request we be well condescended:
Call forth, let see where is your clarioner,<29>
To blow a blast with his long breath extended;
Aeolus, your trumpet,<30> that known is so far,
That bararag bloweth in every martial war,
Let him blow now, that we may take a view
What poets we have at our retinue;

To see if Skelton will put himself in press,
Among the thickest of all the whole rout;                     240
Make noise enough, for clatterers love no peace;
Let see, my sister, now speed you, go about;
Anon, I say, this trumpet were found out,
And for no man hardly let him spare
To blow bararag till both his eyen stare.

SKELTON POETA

Forthwith there rose among the throng
A wonderful noise, and on every side
They pressed in fast; some thought they were too long;
Some were too hasty, and would no man bide;
Some whispered, some rowned, some spake, and some cried.      250
With heaving and shouting, have in and have out;
Some ran the next way, some ran about.

There was suing to the Queen of Fame;
He plucked him back, and he went afore;
Nay, hold thy tongue, quod another, let me have the name;
Make room, said another, Ye press all too sore;
Some said, Hold thy peace, thou gettest here no more;
A thousand thousand I saw on a plump:<31>
With that I heard the noise of a trump,

That long time blew a full timorous blast,                    260
Like to the boreal winds when they blow,
That towers and towns and trees down cast,
Drove clouds together like drifts of snow;
The dreadful din drove all the rout on a row;
Some trembled, some girned, some gasped, some gazed,
As people half peevish, or men that were mazed.

Anon all was whist, as it were for the nonce,
And each man stood gazing and staring upon other:
With that there come in wonderly at once
A murmur of minstrels,<32> that such another                  270
Had I never seen, some softer, some louder;
Orpheus, the Thracian, harped melodiously
With Amphion, and other Muses of Arcady:

Whose heavenly harmony was so passing sure,
So truly proportioned, and so well did agree,
So duly entuned with every measure,
That in the forest was none so great a tree
But that he danced for joy of that glee;
The huge mighty oaks themself did advance,
And leap from the hills to learn for to dance:                280

In so much the stump, whereto I me leant,
Start all at once an hundred foot back:
With that I sprang up toward the tent
Of noble Dame Pallas, whereof I spake;
Where I saw come after, I wot, full little lack
Of a thousand poets assembled together:
But Phoebus was foremost of all that came thither;

Of laurel leaves a coronal on his head,
With hairs encrisped<33> yellow as the gold,
Lamenting Daphnes,<34> whom with the dart of lead<35>         290
Cupid hath striken so that she ne wold
Consent to Phoebus to have his heart in hold,
But, for to preserve her maidenhood clean,
Transformed was she into the laurel green.

Meddled with mourning the most part of his muse,
O thoughtful heart,<36> was evermore his song!
Daphnes, my darling, why do you me refuse?
Yet look on me, that loved you so long,
Yet have compassion upon my pains strong:                     300
He sang also how, the tree as he did take
Between his arms, he felt her body quake.<37>

Then he assurded<38> into this exclamation
Unto Diana, the goddess immortal;
O merciless madame, hard is your constellation,
So close to keep your cloister virginal,
Enharded adamant the cement of your wall!
Alas, what ails you to be so overthwart,
To banish pity out of a maiden's heart?

Why have the gods showed me this cruelty,<39>
Sith I contrived first principles medicinable?                310
I help all other of their infirmity,
But now to help myself I am not able;
That profiteth all other is nothing profitable
Unto me; alas, that herb nor grass
The fervent access of love cannot repress!

O fatal fortune! what have I offended?
Odious disdain, why rayest<40> thou me on this fashion?
But sith I have lost now that I intended,<41>
And may not attain it by no meditation,
Yet, in remembrance of Daphne's transformation,               320
All famous poets ensuing after me
Shall wear a garland of the laurel tree.

This said, a great number followed by and by
Of poets laureate<42> of many divers nations;
Part of their names I think to specify:
First, old Quintilian with his Declamations;
Theocritus with his bucolical relations;
Esiodus, the iconomicar,<43>
And Homerus, the fresh historiar;

Prince of eloquence, Tullius Cicero,                          330
With Sallust against Lucius Cataline,
That wrote the history of Jugurta also;
Ovid, enshrined with the Muses nine;
But blessed Bacchus, the pleasant god of wine,
Of clusters engrossed with his ruddy floats
These orators and poets refreshed their throats;

Lucan, with Statius in Achilleidos;
Persius pressed forth with his problems diffuse;
Virgil the Mantuan, with his Aeneidos;
Juvenal satirray, that men maketh to muse;                    340
But blessed Bacchus, the pleasant god of wine,
Of clusters engrossed with his ruddy floats
These orators and poets refreshed their throats;

There Titus Livius himself did advance
With decades historious, which that he mingleth
With matters that amount the Romans in substance;
Ennius that wrote of martial war at length;
But blessed Bacchus, the potential god of strength,
Of clusters engrossed with his ruddy floats
These orators and poets refreshed their throats;              350

Aulus Gelius,<44.> that noble historiar;
Horace also with his new poetry;<45>
Master Terence, that famous comicar,
With Plautus, that wrote full many a comedy;
But blessed Bacchus was in their company,
Of clusters engrossed with his ruddy floats
These orators and poets refreshed their throats;

Seneca full soberly with his tragedies;
Boyce,<46> recomforted with his philosophy;
And Maximian, with his mad ditties,                           360
How doting age would jape with young folly;<47>
But blessed Bacchus most reverent and holy,
Of clusters engrossed with his ruddy floats
These orators and poets refreshed their throats;

There came John Bochas with his volumes great;<48>
Quintus Curtius,<49> full craftily that wrate
Of Alexander; and Macrobius<50> that did treat
Of Scipio's dream what was the true probate;<51>
But blessed Bacchus that never man forgate,
Of clusters engrossed with his ruddy floats                   370
These orators and poets refreshed their throats;

Poggeus also, that famous Florentine,
Mustered there among them with many a mad tale;<52>
With a friar of France men call Sir Gaguine,<53>
That frowned on me full angerly and pale;
But blessed Bacchus, that boot is of all bale,<54>
Of clusters engrossed with his ruddy floats
These orators and poets refreshed their throats;

Plutarch and Petrarch, two famous clerks;
Lucilius<55> and Valerius, Maximus by name;<56>               380
With Vicentius in Speculo, that wrote noble works;<57>
Propertius and Pisandros,<58> poets of noble fame;
But blessed Bacchus, that masteries oft doth frame,
Of clusters engrossed with his ruddy floats
These notable poets refreshed their throats;

And as I thus sadly among them avised,
I saw Gower, that first garnished our English rude,
And Master Chaucer, that nobly enterprised
How that our English might freshly be ennewed;
The monk of Bury then after them ensued,                      390
Dan John Lydgate: these English poets three,<59>
As I imagined, repaired unto me,

Together in arms, as brethren, embraced;<60>
Their apparel far passing beyond that I can tell;
With diamonds and rubies their tabards were traced,
None so rich stones in Turkey to sell;
They wanted nothing but the laurel;<61>
And of their bounty they made me goodly cheer,
In manner and form as ye shall after hear.

MASTER GOWER to SKELTON

Brother Skelton, your endeavourment                           400
So have ye done, that meritoriously
Ye have deserved to have an employment
In our college above the starry sky,
Because that ye increase and amplify
The bruited Britons of Brutus Albion,<62>
That well-nigh was lost when that we were gone.

The Poet SKELTON to MASTER GOWER

Master Gower, I have nothing deserved
To have so laudable a commendation:
To you three this honour shall be reserved,
Arrecting unto your wise examination                          410
How all that I do is under reformation,
For only the substance of that I intend,
Is glad to please, and loth to offend.

MASTER CHAUCER to SKELTON

Counterweighing your busy diligence
Of that we began in the supplement,
Enforced are we you to recompense,
Of all our whole college by the agreement,
That we shall bring you personally present
Of noble Fame before the Queen's grace,
In whose court appointed is your place.                       420

The Poet SKELTON answereth

O noble Chaucer, whose polished eloquence
Our English rude so freshely hath set out,
That bound are we with all due reverence,
With all our strength that we can bring about,
To owe to you our service, and more if we mought!
But what should I say? Ye wot what I intend,
Which glad am to please, and loth to offend.

MASTER LYDGATE to SKELTON

So am I prevented of my brethren twain
In rendering to you thanks meritory,
That well-nigh nothing there doth remain                      430
Wherewith to give you my regratiatory,
But that I appoint you to be protonotory
Of Fame's court, by all our whole assent
Advanced by Pallas to laurel preferment.

The Poet SKELTON answereth

So have ye me far passing my merits extolled,
Master Lydgate, of your accustomable
Bounty, and so gloriously ye have enrolled
My name, I know well, beyond that I am able,
That but if my works thereto be agreeable,
I am else rebuked of that I intend,                           440
Which glad am to please, and loth to offend.

So finally, when they had showed their devise,
Under the form as I said tofore,
I made it strange,<63> and drew back once or twice,
And ever they pressed on me more and more,
Till at the last they forced me so sore,
That with them I went where they would me bring,
Unto the pavilion where Pallas was sitting.

Dame Pallas commanded that they should me convey
Into the rich palace of the Queen of Fame;                    450
There shall he hear what she will to him say
When he is called to answer to his name;
A cry anon forthwith she made proclaim,
All orators and poets should thither go before,
With all the press that there was, less and more.

Forthwith, I say, thus wandering in my thought,
How it was, or else within what hours,
I cannot tell you, but that I was brought
Into a palace with turrets and towers,
Engalleried goodly with halls and bowers,                     460
So curiously, so craftily, so cunningly wrought
That all the world, I trow, an it were sought,

Such another there could no man find;
Whereof partly I purpose to expound,
Whiles it remaineth fresh in my mind.
With turquoises and chrysolites enpaved was the ground;
Of beryl embossed were the pillars round;
Of elephants' teeth were the palace gates,
Enlozenged with many goodly plates

Of gold, entached with many a precious stone;<64>             470
An hundred steps mounting to the hall,
One of jasper, another of whales' bone;<65>
Of diamonds pointed was the rocky wall;
The carpets within and tapets of pall;<66>
The chambers hanged with cloths of Arras;<67>
Envaulted with rubies the vault was of this place.

Thus passed we forth walking unto the pretory,
Where the poets were embullioned with sapphires Indy blue,
Englazed glittering with many a clear story;
Jacinths and smaragds out of the floorth<68> they grew.       480
Unto this place all poets there did sue,
Wherein was set of Fame the noble Queen,
All other transcending, most richly beseen,

Under a glorious cloth of estate,
Fret all with orient pearls of garnet,
Encrowned as empress of all this worldly fate,
So royally, so richly, so passing ornate,
It was exceeding beyond the common rate.
This house environ was a mile about;                          490
If xii were let in, xii hundred stood without.

Then to this lady and sovereign of this palace
Of pursuivants there pressed in with many a diverse tale;
Some were of Poyle, and some were of Thrace,
Of Limerick, of Lorain, of Spain, of Portingale,
From Naples, from Navern, and from Rouncevale,
Some from Flanders, some from the sea-coast,
Some from the mainland, some from the French host:

With, How doth the north? What tidings in the south?
The west is windy, the east is meetly well;
It is hard to tell of every man's mouth;                      500
A slipper hold the tail is of an eel,
And he halteth often that hath a kiby heel.
Some showed his safe-conduct, some showed his charter,
Some looked full smoothly, and had a false quarter;<69>

With, Sir, I pray you, a little tine stand back,<70>
And let me come in to deliver my letter;
Another told how ships went to wrack;
There were many words smaller and greater;
With, I as good as thou, I'faith and no better;
Some came to tell truth, some came to lie,                    510
Some came to flatter, and some came to spy:

There were, I say, of all manner of sorts,
Of Dartmouth, of Plymouth, of Portsmouth also;
The burgesses and the bailiffs of the v. Ports,<71>
With, Now let me come! and, Now let me go;
And all time wandered I thus to and fro,
Till at the last these noble poets three
Unto me said, Lo, sir, now ye may see

Of this high court the daily business;
From you must we, but not long to tarry;                      520
Lo, hither cometh a goodly mistress,
Occupation, Fame's registrary,
Which shall be to you a sovereign accessary,
With singular pleasures to drive away the time,
And we shall see you again ere it be prime.<72>

When they were passed and went forth on their way,
This gentlewoman, that called was by name
Occupation, in right goodly array,
Came toward me, and smiled half in game;
I saw her smile, and I then did the same;                     530
With that on me she cast her goodly look;
Under her arm, methought, she had a book.

OCCUPATION to SKELTON

Like as the lark, upon the summer's day,
When Titan radiant burnisheth his beams bright,
Mounteth on high with her melodious lay,
Of the sunshine engladed with the light,
So am I surprised with pleasure and delight
To see this hour now, that I may say
How ye are welcome to this court of array.

Of your acquaintance I was in times past,                     540
Of studious doctrine when at the port salu<73>
Ye first arrived; when broken was your mast
Of worldly trust, then did I you rescue;
Your storm-driven ship I repaired new,
So well entackled, what wind that ever blow,
No stormy tempest your barge shall overthrow.

Welcome to me as heartily as heart can think,
Welcome to me with all my whole desire!
And for my sake spare neither pen nor ink;
Be well assured I shall aquite your hire,                     550
Your name recounting beyond the land of Tyre,
From Sidony to the mount Olympian,
From Babel's Tower to the hills Caspian.

SKELTON POETA answereth

I thanked her much of her most noble offer,
Affiancing her mine whole assurance
For her pleasure to make a large proffer,
Imprinting her words in my remembrance,
To owe her my service with true perseverance.
Come on with me, she said, let us not stand;
And with that word she took me by the hand.                   560

So passed we forth into the foresaid place,
With such communication as came to our mind.
And then she said, Whiles we have time and space
To walk where we list, let us somewhat find
To pass the time with, but let us waste no wind,
For idle janglers have but little brain;
Words be swords, and hard to call again.

Into a field she brought me wide and large,
Enwalled about with the stony flint,
Strongly enbattled, much costious of charge.                  570
To walk on this wall she bade I should not stint.
Go softly, she said, the stones be full glint.
She went before, and bade me take good hold:
I saw a thousand gates new and old,

Then questioned I her what those gates meant;
Whereto she answered, and briefly me told,
How from the east unto the occident,
And from the south unto the north so cold,
These gates, she said, which that ye behold,
Be issues and ports from all manner of nations;               580
And seriously she showed me their denominations.

They had writing, some Greeke, some Hebrew,
Some Roman letters, as I understood;
Some were old written, some were written new,
Some characters of Chaldee, some French was full good;
But one gate specially, where as I stood,
Had graven in it of chalcedony a capital A;
What gate call ye this? And she said, Anglia.

The building thereof was passing commendable;
Whereon stood a leopard, crowned with gold and stones,        590
Terrible of countenance and passing formidable,
As quickly touched<74> as it were flesh and bones,
As ghastly that glares, and grimly that groans,
As fiercely frowning as he had been fighting,
And with his fore foot he shook forth this writing:

Formidanda nimis Jovis ultima fulmina tollis:
Unguibus ire parat loca singula livida curvis
Quam modo per Phoebes nummos raptura Celaeno;
Arma, lues, luctus, fel, vis, fraus, barbara tellus;
Mille modis erras odium tibi quaerere Martis:                 600
Spreto spineto cedant saliunca roseto.<75>

Then I me leant, and looked over the wall.
Innumerable people pressed to every gate.
Shut were the gates; they might well knock and call,
And turn home again, for they came all too late.
I her demanded of them and their estate:
Forsooth, quod she, they be haskards<76> and ribalds,
Dicers, carders, tumblers with gamboldes.

Furtherers of love,<77> with bawdry aquainted,
Brainless blinkards that blow at the coal,<78>                610
False forgers of money, for coinage attainted,
Pope-holy hypocrites, as they were gold and whole,<79>
Pole-hatchets,<80> that prate will at every ale-pole,
Riot, reveller, railer, bribery, theft,
With other conditions that well might be left:

Some feign themselves fools, and would be called wise,
Some meddling spies, by craft to grope thy mind,
Some disdainous dawcocks that all men despise,
False flatterers that fawn thee, and curs of kind
That speak fair before thee and shrewdly behind;              620
Hither they come crowding to get them a name,
But haled they be homeward with sorrow and shame.

With that I heard guns rush out at once,
Bounce, bounce, bounce! that all they out cried;
It made some limp-legged and bruised their bones;
Some were made peevish, porishly pink-eyed,
That ever more after by it they were espied;
And one was there, I wondered of his hap,
For a gun-stone, I say, had all to-jagged his cap,

Ragged and dagged, and cunningly cut,                         630
The blast of the brimstone blew away his brain;
Mazed as a March-hare, he ran like a scut;
And, sir, among all methought I saw twain,
The one was a tumbler, that afterwards again
Of a dicer, a devil way, grew a gentleman,
Pierce Prater the second, that quarrels began;

With a pellet of peevishness they had such a stroke,
That all the days of their life shall stick by their ribs:
Faugh, foisty bawdias! some smelled of the smoke;
I saw divers that were carried away thence in cribs,          640
Dazing after dotterels, like drunkards that dribs;
These titivels with tampions were touched and tapped;
Much mischiefs, I hight you, among them there happed.

Sometime, as it seemeth, when the moon-light
By means of a grisly endarked cloud
Suddenly is eclipsed in the winter night,
In like manner of wise a mist did us shroud;
But well may ye think I was nothing proud
Of that aventure, which made me sore aghast.
In darkeness thus dwelt we, till at the last                  650

The clouds gan to clear, the mist was rarified;
In an arbour I saw, brought where I was,
There birds on the briar sang on every side;
With alleys ensanded about in compass,<81>
The banks enturfed with singular solace,<82>
Enrailed with rosers, and vines engraped;
It was a new comfort of sorrows escaped.

In the midst a conduit, that curiously was cast,
With pipes of gold engushing out streams;
Of crystal the clearness these waters far past,               660
Enswimming with roaches, barbels, and breams,
Whose scales ensilvered against the sun-beams
Englistered, that joyous it was to behold.
Then furthermore about me my sight I revoled,

Where I saw growing a goodly laurel tree,
Enverdured with leaves continually green;
Above in the top a bird of Araby
Men call a phoenix; her wings between
She beat up a fire<83> with the spark full keen 
With branches and boughs of the sweet olive,<84>              670
Whose flagrant flower<85> was chief preservative

Against all infections with canker inflamed,<86>
Against all barratous bruisers of old,
It passed all balms that ever were named,
Or gums of Araby so dearly that be sold.
There blew in that garden a soft pipling cold
Enbreathing of Zephyrus with his pleasant wind;
All fruits and flowers grew there in their kind.

Dryads there danced upon that goodly soil,
With the nine Muses, Pierides by name;<87>                    680
Phyllis and Testalis,<88> their tresses with oil
Were newly enbibed; and round about the same
Green tree of laurel much solacious game
They made, with chapelts and garlands green;
And foremost of all dame Flora, the queen

Of summer, so formally she footed the dance;
There Cyntheus sat twinkling upon his harp-strings;<89>
And Iopas<90> his instrument did advance,
The poems and stories, ancient inbrings
Of Atlas' astrology, and many noble things,                   690
Of wandering of the moon, the course of the sun,
Of men and of beasts, and whereof they begun,

What thing occasioned the showers of rain,
Of fire elementar in his supreme sphere,
And of that pole arctic which doth remain
Behind the tail of Ursa so clear;
Of Pleiades he preached with their drowsy cheer,
Emoistured with misling and aye dropping dry<91>,
And where the two Trions<92> a man should espy,

And of the winter days that hie them so fast,                 700
And of the winter nights that tarry so long,
And of the summer days so long that do last,
And of their short nights; he brought in his song
How wrong was no right, and right was no wrong.
There was countering of carols in metre and verse
So many, that long it were to rehearse.

OCCUPATION to SKELTON

How say ye? is this after your appetite?
May this content you and your merry mind?
Here dwelleth pleasure, with lust and delight;
Continual comfort here ye may find,                           710
Of wealth and solace no thing left behind;
All thing convenable here is contrived,
Wherewith your spirits may be revived.

The Poet SKELTON answereth

Questionless no doubt of that ye say;
Jupiter himselfe this life might endure;
This joy exceedeth all worldly sport and play,
Paradise this place is of singular pleasure:
O well were him that hereof might be sure,
And here to inhabit and aye for to dwell!
But, goodly mistress, one thing ye me tell.                   720

OCCUPATION to SKELTON

Of your demand show me the content,
What it is, and whereupon it stands;
And if there be in it anything meant,
Whereof the answer resteth in my hands,
It shall be loosed full soon out of the bands
Of scrupulous doubt; wherefore your mind discharge,
And of your will the plainness show at large.

The Poet SKELTON answereth

I thank you, goodly mistress, to me most benign,
That of your bounty so well have me assured;
But my request is not so great a thing,                       730
That I ne force what though it be discured;
I am not wounded but that I may be cured;
I am not laden of litherness with lumps,<93>
As dazed dotards that dream in their dumps.

OCCUPATION to SKELTON

Now what ye mean, I trow I conject;
God give you good year, ye make me to smile!
Now, by your faith, is not this th'effect
Of your question ye make all this while,
To understand who dwelleth in yon pile,
And what blunderer is yonder that played diddle diddle?       740
He findeth false measures out of his fond fiddle.

Interpolata, que industriosum postulat interpretem, satira in
vatis adversarium.<94>

<95>Tressis agasonis<96> species prior, altera Davi:
Aucupium culicis, limis dum torquet ocellum,
Concipit, aligeras rapit, appetit, aspice, muscas!
Maia quaeque fovet, foyer aut quae Jupiter, aut quae<97>
Frigida Saturnus, Sol, Mars, Venus, algida Luna,
Si tibi contingat verbo aut committere scripto,
Quam sibi max tacita sudant praecordia culpa!<98>
Hinc ruit in flammas, stimulans hunc urget et illum,
Invocat ad rixas, vanos tamen excitat ignes,                  750
Labra movens tacitus<99>, rumpantur ut ilia Codro.<100>

17. 4. 7. 2. 17. 5. 18.
18. 19. 1. 19. 8. 5. 12 <101>

His name for to know if that ye list,
Envious Rancour truly he hight:
Beware of him, I warn you; for an ye wist
How dangerous it were to stand in his light,
Ye would not deal with him, though that ye might,
For by his devilish drift and graceless provision
An whole realm he is able to set at division:

For when he speaketh fairest, then thinketh he most ill;
Full gloriously can he glose, thy mind for to feel;           760
He will set men a-fighting, and sit himself still,
And smirk, like a smithy cur, at sparks of steel;
He can never leave work whilst it is weel;
To tell all his touches it were too great wonder;
The devil of hell and he be seldom asunder.

Thus talking we went both in at a postern gate;
Turning on the right hand, by a winding stair,
She brought me to a goodly chamber of estate,
Where the noble Countess of Surrey<102> in a chair
Sat honourably, to whom did repair                            770
Of ladies a bevy with all due reverence:
Sit down, fair ladies, and do your diligence!

Come forth, gentlewomen, I pray you, she said;
I have contrived for you a goodly wark,
And who can work best now shall be assayed;
A coronal of laurel with verdures light and dark
I have devised for Skelton, my clerk;
For to his service I have such regard
That of our bounty we will him reward:

For of all ladies he hath the library,                        780
Their names recounting in the court of Fame;
Of all gentlewomen he hath the scrutiny,
In Fame's court reporting the same;
For yet of women he never said shame,
But if they were counterfeits, that women them call,
That list of their lewdness with him for to brawl.

With that the tapets and carpets<103> were laid,
Whereon these ladies softly might rest,
The sampler to sew on, the laces to embraid;
To weave in the stool<104> some were full prest;              790
With sleys, with tavells, with hiddles well dressed;<105>
The frame was brought forth with his weaving pin:
God give them good speed their work to begin!

Some to embroider put them in press,<106>
Well guiding their glowtonn<107> to keep straight their silk,
Some pirling<108> of gold their work to increase
With fingers small, and hands white as milk;
With, Reach me that skein of tuly<109>silk;
And, Wind me that bottom<110> of such an hue,
Green, red, tawny, white, black, purple, and blue.            800

Of broken works wrought many a goodly thing,
In casting, in turning, in flourishing of flowers,
With burrs rough and buttons surfling,
In needle-work raising birds in bowers,
With virtue enbusied all times and hours;
And truly of their bounty thus were they bent
To work me this chaplet by good advisement.

OCCUPATION to SKELTON

Behold and see in your advertisement
How these ladies and gentlewomen all
For your pleasure do their endeavourment,                     810
And for your sake how fast to work they fall:
To your remembrance wherefore ye must call
In goodly words pleasantly comprised,
That for them some goodly conceit be devised,

With proper captations of benevolence,<111>
Ornately polished after your faculty,
Sith ye must needs aforce it by pretence
Of your profession unto humanity,<112>
Commencing your process after their degree,
To each of them rendering thanks commendable,                 820
With sentence fructuous and terms convenable.

The Poet SKELTON

Advancing myself some thank to deserve,
I me determined for to sharp my pen,
Devoutly arecting my prayer to Minerva,
She to vouchsafe me to inform and ken;
To Mercury also heartily prayed I then,
Me to support, to help, and to assist,
To guide and to govern my dreadful trembling fist.

As a mariner that amazed is in a stormy rage,
Hardly bested and driven is to hope                           830
Of that the tempestuous wind will assuage,
In trust whereof comfort his heart doth grope,
From the anchor he cutteth the cable rope,
Commiteth all to God, and letteth his ship ride;
So I beseech Jesu now to be my guide.

To the right noble COUNTESS OF SURREY

After all duly ordered obeisance,
In humble wise as lowly as I may,
Unto you, madam, I make recognizance,
My life enduring I shall both write and say,
Recount, report, rehearse without delay                       840
The passing bounty of your noble estate,
Of honour and worship which hath the former date;

Like to Argea by just resemblance,
The noble wife of Polimites king;<113>
Prudent Rebecca, of whom remembrance
The Bible maketh; with whose chaste living
Your noble demeanour is counterweighing, 
Whose passing bounty, and right noble estate,
Of honour and worship it hath the former date.

The noble Pamphila, queen of the Greeks' land,<114>           850
Habiliments royal found out industriously;
Thamer also wrought with her goodly hand
Many devices passing curiously;<115>
Whom ye represent and exemplify,
Whose passing bounty, and right noble estate,
Of honour and worship it hath the former date.

As Dame Thamarys, which took the king of Perce,
Cyrus by name, as writeth the story;
Dame Agrippina also I may rehearse
Of gentle courage and perfite memory;<116>                    860
So shall your name endure perpetually,
Whose passing bounty, and right noble estate,
Of honour and worship it hath the former date.

To my Lady ELIZABETH HOWARD<117>

To be your remembrancer, madam, I am bound,
Like to Aryna,<118> maidenly of port,
Of virtue and conning the well and perfect ground;
Whom dame Nature, as well I may report,
Hath freshly embeautied with many a goodly sort
Of womanly features, whose flourishing tender age
Is lusty to look on, pleasant, demure, and sage.

Good Creisseid, fairer than Polexene<119>,                    870
For to envive Pandarus' appetite;
Troilus, I trow, if that he had you seen,
In you he would have set his whole delight:
Of all your beauty I suffice not to write;
But, as I said, your flourishing tender age
Is lusty to look on, pleasant, demure, and sage.

To my Lady MIRRIELL HOWARD<120>

My little lady I may not leave behind,
But do her service needs now I must;
Benign, courteous, of gentle heart and mind,                  880
Whom Fortune and Fate plainly have discussed<121>
Long to enjoy pleasure, delight, and lust:<122>
The embudded blossoms of roses red of hue
With lilies white your beauty doth renew.

Compare you I may to Cydippes, the maid,
That of Acontius, when she found the bill<123>
In her bosom, lord, how she was afraid!
The ruddy shamefacedness in her visage fill,
Which manner of abashment became her not ill.
Right so, madam, the roses red of hue                         890
With lilies white your beauty doth renew.

To my Lady ANNE DAKERS of the South<124>

Zeuxes that empictured fair Elene the queen,
You to devise his craft were to seek;<125>
And if Apelles your countenance had seen,
Of portraiture which was the famous Greek,
He could not devise the least point of your cheek;
Princess of youth, and flower of goodly port,
Virtue, conning, solace, pleasure, comfort.

Paregal in honour unto Penelope,
That for her truth is in remembrance had;                     900
Fair Diianira surmounting in beauty;
Demure Diana womanly and sad,
Whose lusty looks make heavy hearts glad!
Princess of youth, and flower of goodly port,
Virtue, conning, solace, pleasure, comfort.

TO MISTRESS MARGERY WENTWORTH<126>

With marjoram gentle,
The flower of goodlihead,
Embroidered the mantle
Is of your maidenhead.

Plainly I cannot glose;                                       910
Ye be, as I divine,
The pretty primrose,
The goodly columbine.
With marjoram gentle,
The flower of goodlihead,
Embroidered the mantle
Is of your maidenhead.

Benign, courteous, and meek,
With words well devised;
In you, who list to seek,                                     920
Be virtues well comprised.
With marjoram gentle,
The flower of goodlihead,
Embroidered the mantle
Is of your maidenhead.

TO MISTRESS MARGARET TYLNEY<127>

I you assure,
Full well I know
My busy cure
To you I owe;
Humbly and low                                                930
Commending me
To your bounty.

As Machareus
Fair Canace,<128>
So I, ywis,
Endeavour me
Your name to see
It be enrolled, 
Written with gold.

Phaedra ye may                                                940
Well represent;
Attentive aye
And diligent,
No time misspent;
Wherefore delight
I have to write

Of Margarite,
Pearl orient,<129>
Lode-star of light,
Much relucent;                                                950
Madam regent
I may you call
Of virtues all

TO MISTRESS JANE BLENNERHASSET<130>

What though my pen wax faint,
And hath small lust to paint?
Yet shall there no restraint
Cause me to cease,
Among this press,
For to increase
Your goodly name.                                             960

I will myself apply,
Trust me, intentively,
You for to stellify;
And so observe
That ye ne swerve
For to deserve
Immortal fame.

Sith Mistress Jane Hasset
Small flowers helped to set
In my goodly chaplet,                                         970
Therefore I render of her the memory 
Unto the legend of far Laodami.<131>

TO MISTRESS ISABEL PENNELL

By Saint Mary, my lady,
Your mammy and your daddy
Brought forth a goodly baby!

My maiden Isabel,
Reflairing rosabel.
The fragrant chamomile;

The ruddy rosary,
The sovereign rosemary,                                       980
The pretty strawberry;

The columbine, the nept,
The gillyflower well set,
The proper violet;

Ennewed your colour
Is like the daisy flower
After the April shower;

Star of the morrow gray,
The blossom on the spray,                                     990
The freshest flower of May;

Maidenly demure,
Of womanhood the lure;
Wherefore I make you sure,

It were an heavenly health,
It were an endless wealth,
A life for God himself,
To hear this nightingale

Among the birds small
Warbling in the vale,
Dug, dug,                                                    1000
Jug, jug,
Good year and good luck,
With chuck, chuck, chuck, chuck!

TO MISTRESS MARGARET HUSSEY

Merry Margaret,
As midsummer flower,
Gentle as falcon<132>
Or hawk of the tower;<133>

With solace and gladness,
Much mirth and no madness,
All good and no badness,                                     1010
So joyously,
So maidenly,
So womanly
Her demeaning
In every thing,
Far, far passing
That I can indite,
Or suffice to write
Of Merry Margaret
As midsummer flower,                                         1020
Gentle as falcon
Or hawk of the tower;

As patient and still
And as full of good will
As fair Isaphill,<134>
Coriander,
Sweet pomander,<135>
Good cassander,<136>
Steadfast of thought,
Well made, well wrought;                                     1030
Far may be sought
Ere that ye can find
So courteous, so kind
As Merry Margaret,
This midsummer flower,
Gentle as falcon
Or hawk of the tower.

TO MISTRESS GERTRUDE STATHAM

Though ye were hard-hearted,
And I with you thwarted
With words that smarted,                                     1040
Yet now doubtless ye give me cause
To write of you this goodly clause,
Mistress Gertrude,
With womanhood endued,
With virtue well renewed.

I will that ye shall be
In all benignity
Like to dame Pasiphae;<137>
For now doubtless ye give me cause
To write of you this goodly clause,                          1050
With womanhood endued,
With virtue well renewed.

Partly by your counsel,
Garnished with laurel
Was my fresh coronal;
Wherefore doubtless ye give me cause
To write of you this goodly clause,
Mistress Gertrude,
With womanhood endued,                                       1060
With virtue well renewed.

TO MISTRESS ISABEL KNIGHT

But if I should aquite your kindness,
Else say ye might
That in me were great blindness,
I for to be so mindless,
And could not write
Of Isabel Knight.

It is not my custom nor my guise
To leave behind
Her that is both womanly and wise,                           1070
And specially which glad was to devise
The means to find
To please my mind,

In helping to work my laurel green
With silk and gold:
Galathea, the maid well beseen,
Was never half so fair, as I ween,
Which was extoll'd
A thousandfold

By Maro, the Mantuan prudent,<138>                           1080
Who list to read;
But, an I had leisure competent,
I could shew you such a precedent
In very deed
How ye exceed.

OCCUPATION to SKELTON

Withdraw your hand, the time passes fast;
Set on your head this laurel which is wrought;
Hear you not Aeolus for you bloweth a blast?
I dare well say that ye and I be sought.
Make no delay, for now ye must be brought                    1090
Before my lady's grace, the Queen of Fame,
Where ye must briefly answer to your name.

SKELTON POETA

Casting my sight the chamber about,
To see how duly each thing in order was,
Toward the door, as we were coming out,
I saw Master Newton sit with his compass,
His plummet, his pencil, his spectacles of glass,
Devising in picture, by his industrious wit,
Of my laurel the process every whit.

Forthwith upon this, as it were in a thought,                1100
Gower, Chaucer, Lydgate, these three
Before remembered, me courteously brought
Into that place whereas they left me,
Where all the said poets sat in their degree.
But when they saw my laurel, richly wrought,
All other beside were counterfeit they thought

In comparison of that which I wear:
Some praised the pearl, some the stones bright;
Well was him that thereupon might stare:
Of this work they had so great delight,                      1110
The silk, the gold, the flowers fresh to sight,
They said my laurel was the goodliest
That ever they saw, and wrought it was the best.

In her estate<139> there sat the noble Queen
Of Fame: perceiving how that I was come,
She wondered, methought, at my laurel green;
She looked haughty, and gave on me a glum:
There was among them no word then but mum,<140>
For each man hearkened what she would to me say;
Whereof in substance I brought this away.                    1120

The QUEEN OF FAME to SKELTON

My friend, sith ye are before us here present
To answer unto this noble audience,
Of that shall be reasoned ye must be content;
And, for as much as by the high pretence
That ye have now thorough pre-eminence
Of laureate triumph, your place is here reserved,
We will understand how ye have it deserved.

SKELTON POETA to the QUEEN OF FAME

Right high and mighty princess of estate,
In famous glory all other transcending,
Of your bounty the accustomable rate                         1130
Hath been full often and yet is intending
To all that to reason is condescending,
But if hastive credence, by maintenance of might
Fortune to stand between you and the light:

But such evidence I think for to induce,
As so largely to lay for mine indemnity,
That I trust to make mine excuse
Of what charge soever ye lay against me;
For of my books part ye shall see,
Which in your records, I know well, be enrolled,             1140
And so Occupation, your registrar, me told.

Forthwith she commanded I should take my place;
Calliope pointed me where I should sit:
With that, Occupation pressed in apace;
Be merry, she said, be not afeard a whit,
Your discharge here under mine arm is it.
So then commanded she was upon this
To show her book; and she said, Here it is.

The QUEEN OF FAME to OCCUPATION

Your book of remembrance we will now that ye read;
If any records in number can be found                        1150
What Skelton hath compiled and written indeed
Rehearsing by order, and what is the ground,
Let see now for him how ye can expound;
For in our court, ye wot well, his name cannot rise
But if he write oftener than once or twice.

The Poet SKELTON

With that of the book loosened were the clasps:
The margin was illumined all with golden rails
And byse<141>, empictured with gressops and wasps,
With butterflies and fresh peacock tails,
Enflowered with flowers and slimy snails;                    1160
Envived pictures well touched and quickly;<142>
It would have made a man whole that had been right sickly,

To behold how it was garnished and bound,<143>
Encovered over with gold of tissue fine;
The clasps and bullions were worth a thousand pound;<144>
With balasses<145> and carbuncles the borders did shine;
With aurum musicum<146> every other line
Was written: And so she did her speed,
Occupation, immediately to read.

OCCUPATION readeth and expoundeth some part of Skelton's books and
ballads with ditties of pleasure, inasmuch as it were too long a
process to rehearse all by name that he hath compiled, etc.

Of your orator and poet laureate<147>                        1170
Of England, his works here they begin:
In primis<148> the Book of Honourous Estate;<149>
Item, the Book how men shoulde flee sin;
Item, Royal Demeanance worship to win;
Item, the Book to speak well or be still;
Item, to learn you to die when ye will;<150>

Of Virtue also the sovereign interlude;<151>
The Book of the Rosier; Prince Arthur's Creation;<152>
The False Faith that now goeth, which daily is renewed;
Item, his Dialogues of Imagination;                          1180
Item, Antomedon <153> of Love's Meditation;
Item, New Grammar in English compiled;
Item, Bowge of Court<154>, where Dread was beguiled;

His comedy, Achademios called by name;<155>
Of Tully's Familiars the translation;<156>
Item, Good Advisement, that brainless doth blame;
The Recule against Gaguin of the French nation;<157>
Item, the Popinjay, that hath in commendation
Ladies and gentlewomen such as deserved,
And such as be counterfeits they be reserved;<158>           1190

And of Sovereignty a noble pamphlet;<159>
And of Magnificence<160> a notable matter,
How Counterfeit Countenance of the new jet
With Crafty Conveyance doth smatter and flatter,
And Cloaked Collusion is brought in to clatter
With Courtly Abusion; who printeth it well in mind
Much doubleness of the world therein he may find;

Of Mannerly Mistress Margery Milk and Ale,<161>
To her he wrote many matters of mirth;
Yet, though I say it, thereby lieth a tale,                  1200
For Margery winched, and brake her hinder-girth;
Lor, how she made much of her gentle birth!
With, Gingerly, go gingerly! her tail was made of hay;
Go she never so gingerly, her honesty is gone away;

Hard to make ought of that is naked nought;<162>
This fustian mistress and this giggish gase,
Wonder is to write what wrenches she wrought,
To face out her folly with a midsummer maze;
With pitch she patched her pitcher should not craze;<163>
It may well rhyme, but shrewdly it doth accord,<164>         1210
To pick out honesty of such a potsherd:

Patet per versus.<165>

Hinc puer hic natus: vir conjugis hinc spoliatus
Jure thori; est foetus Deli de sanguine cretus;
Hinc magis extollo, quad erit puer alter Apollo;
Si quaeris qualis? meretrix castissima talis;
Et relis, et ralis et reliqualis.<166>

A good herring of these old tales;
Find no more such from Wanfleet to Wales.
Et reliquae omelia de diversis tractatibus.<167>

Of my lady's grace at the contemplation,
Out of French into English prose,                            1220
Of Man's Life the Peregrination,
He did translate, interpret, and disclose;<168>
The Treatise of Triumphs of the Red Rose,<169>
Wherein many stories are briefly contained
That unremembered long time remained:

The Duke of York's creancer when Skelton was,
Now Henry the viij, King of England,
A treatise he devised and brought it to pass,
Called Speculum Principis, to bear in his hand,<170.>
Therein to read, and to understand                           1230
All the demeanour of princely estate,
To be our King, of God preordinate;

Also the Tunning of Elinour Rumming,<171>
With Colyn Cloute,<172> John Ive, with Ioforth, Jack;<173> 
To make such trifles it asketh some conning,
In honest mirth pardie requireth no lack;
The white appeareth the better for the black,
After conveyance<174> as the world goes,
It is no folly to use the Welshman's hose;<175>

The umbles of venison, the bottle of wine,                   1240
To fair Mistress Anne that should have be sent,<176>
He wrote thereof many a pretty line,
Where it became, and whither it went,
And how that it was wantonly spent;
The Ballad also of the Mustard Tart
Such problems to paint it longeth to his art;

Of one Adam all a knave, late dead and gone,-<177>
Dormiat in pace,<178> like a dormouse!-
He wrote an Epitaph for his grave-stone,
With words devout and sentence aigre-douce,                  1250
For he was ever against God's house,
All his delight was to brawl and to bark
Against Holy Church, the priest, and the clerk;

Of Philip Sparrow the lamentable fate,<179>
The doleful destiny, and the careful chance,
Devised by Skelton after the funeral rate;
Yet some there be therewith that take grievance,
And grudge thereat with frowning countenance;
But what of that? hard it is to please all men;<180>         1260
Who list amend it, let him set to his pen;

<181>

The grunting and the groigning of the groaning swine;<182>
Also the Mourning of the Maple Root;<183>
How the green coverlet suffered great pine,
When the fly-net was set for to catch a coot,
Struck one with a bird-bolt to the heart-root;               1380
Also a devout Prayer to Moses' horns,<184>
Metrified merrily, meddled with scorns;

Of pageants that were played in Joyous Garde;<185>
He wrote of a Muse through a mud wall;
How a doe came tripping in at the rearward,
But, lord, how the parker was wroth withal!
And of Castle Angel the fenestral,<186>
Glittering and glistering and gloriously glazed,
It made some men's eyen dazzled and dazed;

The Repeat of the Recule of Rosamond's bower,<187>           1390
Of his pleasant pain there and his glad distress
In planting and plucking a proper gillyflower flower;
But how it was, some were too reckless,
Notwithstanding it is remediless;
What might she say? what might he do thereto?
Though Jack said nay, yet Mock there lost her shoe;<188>

How then like a man he won the barbican<189>
With a saute of solace at the long last;
The colour deadly, swart, blo, and wan
Of Exion, her lambs dead and past,<190>                      1400
The cheek and the neck but a short cast;
In Fortune's favour ever to endure,
No man living, he sayeth, can be sure;

How dame Minerva first found the olive tree,<191> 	she read
And planted it where never before was none; 	unshred
An hind enhurt, hit by casualty, 	not bled
Recovered when the forester was gone; 	and sped
The harts of the herd began for to groan, 	and fled
The hounds began to yearn and to quest;<192> 	and dread
With little business standeth much rest;<193> 	in bed	1410

His Epitomes of the miller and his jolly make;<194>
How her blee was bright as blossom on the spray,
A wanton wench and well could bake a cake;
The miller was loth to be out of the way,
But yet for all that, be as be may,
Whether he rode to Swaffham or to Soham,
The miller durst not leave his wife at home;

With, Woefully Arrayed, and shamefully betrayed;<195>
Of his making devout meditations;
Vexilla regis<196> he devised to be displayed;               1420
With Sacris solemniis,<197> and other contemplations,
That in them comprised considerations;
Thus passeth he the time both night and day,
Sometime with sadness, sometime with play;

Though Galen and Dioscorides,<198>
With Ipocras and Master Avycen,<1199>
By their physic doth many a man ease,
And though Albumasar<200> can thee inform and ken<201>
What constellations are good or bad for men,
Yet when the rain raineth and the goose winketh,             1430
Little wotteth the gosling what the goose thinketh;

He is not wise against the stream that striveth;<202>
Dun is in the mire<203>, dame, reach me my spur;
Needs must he run that the devil driveth;
When the steed is stolen, spar the stable-door;
A gentle hound should never play the cur;
It is soon espied where the thorn pricketh;
And well wotteth that cat whose beard she licketh;

With Marion clarion, sol, lucerne,<204>
Grand juir,<205> of this French proverb old,                 1440
How men were wont for to discern
By Candlemas Day what weather should hold;
But Marion clarion was caught with a cold cold (anglice a cuckold,
And all overcast with clouds unkind,
This goodly flower with storms was untwined;

This gillyflower gentle, this rose, this lily flower,<206>
This primrose peerless, this proper violet,
This columbine clear and freshest of colour,
This delicate daisy, this strawberry prettily set,
With froward frosts, alas, was all to-fret!                  1450
But who may have a more ungracious life
Than a child's bird and a knave's wife?<207>

Think what ye will<208>
Of this wanton bill;
By Mary Gipsy,<209>
Quad scripsi, scripsi:<210>
Uxor tua, sicut vitis,
Habetis in custodiam,
Custodite sicut scitis,
Secundum Lucam, etc.<211>                                    1460

Of the Bonhams of Ashridge beside Berkhamstead,
That goodly place to Skelton most kind,
Where the sank royal is, Christ's blood so red,<212>
Whereupon he metrified after his mind;
A pleasanter place than Ashridge is, hard were to find,
As Skelton rehearseth, with words few and plain,
In his distichon made on verses twain;

Fraxinus in clivo frondetque viret sine rivo,
Non est sub divo similis sine flumine vivo; <213>

The Nation of Fools he left not behind;<214>                 1470
Item, Apollo that whirled up his chair,<215>
That made some to snurr and snuff in the wind;
It made them to skip, to stamp, and to stare,
Which, if they be happy, have cause to beware
In rhyming and railing with him for to mell,
For dread that he learn them their A,B,C, to spell.

The Poet SKELTON

With that I stood up, half suddenly afraid;
Supplying to Fame, I besought her grace,
And that it would please her, full tenderly I prayed,
Out of her books Apollo to rase.                             1480
Nay, sir, she said, whatso in this place
Of our noble courte is once spoken out,<216>
It must needs after run all the world about.

God wot, these words made me full sad;
And when that I saw it would no better be,
But that my petition would not be had, 
What should I do but take it in gree?
For, by Jupiter and his high majesty,<217>
I did what I could to scrape out the scrolls,
Apollo to rase out of her Ragman Rolls.<218>                 1490

Now hereof it irketh me longer to write;<219>
To Occupation I will again resort,
Which read on still, as it came to her sight,
Rendering my devices I made in disport
Of the Maiden of Kent called Comfort,<219>
Of Lovers' testaments and of their wanton wiles,
And how Iollas loved goodly Phyllis; <220>

Diodorus Siculus of my translation
Out of fresh Latin into our English plain,<221>
Recounting commodities of many a strange nation;<222>        1500
Who readeth it once would read it again;
Six volumes engrossed together it doth contain.
But when of the laurel she made rehearsal,
All orators and poets, with other great and small,

A thousand thousand, I trow, to my dome,<223>
Triumpha, triumpha! they cried all about;
Of trumpets and clarions the noise went to Rome;<224>
The starry heaven, methought, shook with the shout;
The ground groaned and trembled, the noise was so stout:
The Queen of Fame commanded shut fast the book;              1510
And therewith suddenly out of my dream I woke.

My mind of the great din was somedeal amazed,
I wiped mine eyen for to make them clear;
Then to the heaven spherical upward I gazed,
Where I saw Janus, with his double cheer,
Making his almanac for the new year;
He turned his tirikkis, his volvelle ran fast:<225>
Good luck this new year! the old year is past.

Mens tibi sit consulta, petis? sic consule menti;
Aemula sit Jani, retro speculetur et ante.<226>              1520

Skeltonis alloquitur librum suum.<227>

Ite, Britannorum lux O radiosa, Britannum
Carmina nostra pium vestrum celebrate Catullum!
Dicite, Skeltonis vester Adonis erat;
Dicite, Skeltonis vester Homerus erat.
Barbara cum Latio pariter iam currite versu;
Et licet est verbo pars maxima texta Britanno,
Non magis incompta nostra Thalia patet,
Est magis inculta nec mea Calliope.
Nec vos poeniteat livoris tela subire,
Nec vos poeniteat rabiem tolerare caninam,                   1530
Nam Macro dissimiles non tulit ille minas,
Immunis nec enim Musa Nasonis erat.<228>

L'ENVOY

Go, little quaire,
Demean you fair;
Take no despair,
Though I you wrate
After this rate
In English letter;
So much the better
Welcome shall ye                                             1540
To some men be:
For Latin warks
Be good for clerks;
Yet now and then
Some Latin men
May haply look
Upon your book,
And so proceed
In you to read,
That so indeed
Your fame may spread                                         1550
In length and breadth.
But then I dread
Ye shall have need
You for to speed
To harness bright,
By force of might,
Again envy
And obloquy:
And wot ye why?                                              1560
Not for to fight
Against despite,
Nor to derain
Battle again
Scornful disdain,
Nor for to chide,
Nor for to hide
You cowardly;
But courteously
That I have penned                                           1570
For to defend,
Under the banner
Of all good manner,
Under protection
Of sad correction,
With toleration
And supportation
Of reformation,
If they can spy
Circumspectly                                                1580
Any word defaced<229>
That might be rased,
Else ye shall pray
Them that ye may
Continue still
With their good will.

Ad serenissimam Majestatem Regiam, pariter cum Domino
Cardinali, Legato a latere honorificatissimo, etc. <230>

L'AUTRE ENVOY<231>

Perge, liber, celebrem pronus regem venerare
Henricum octavum, resonans sua praemia laudis.               1590
Cardineum dominum pariter venerando salutes,
Legatum a latere, et fiat memor ipse precare
Prebendae, quam promisit mihi credere quondam,
Meque suum referas pignus sperare salutis
Inter spemque metum.<232>

'Tween hope and dread
My life I lead,
But of my speed
Small sickerness:
Howbeit I rede                                               1600
Both word and deed
Should be agreed
In nobleness:
Or else, etc.

ADMONET SKELTONIS OMNES ARBORES DARE LOCUM VIRIDI LAURO JUXTA
GENUS SUUM.

Fraxinus in silvis, altis in montibus ornus,
Populus in fluviis, abies, patulissima fagus,
Lenta salix, platanus, pinguis ficulnea ficus,
Glandifera et quercus, pirus, esculus, ardua pinus,
Balsamus exudans, oleaster, oliva Minervae,
Juniperus, buxus, lentiscus cuspide lenta,
Botrigera et domino vitis gratissima Baccho,
Rex et sterilis labrusca perosa colonis,
Mollibus exudans fragrantia thura Sabaeis
Thus, redolens Arabis pariter notissima myrrha, 
Et vos, O coryli fragiles, humilesque myricae,                 10
Et vos, O cedri redolentes, vos quoque myrti,
Arboris omne genus viridi concedite lauro!
Prennees en gre
The Laurelle.<233>

EN PARLAMENT A PARIS

Justice est morte,
Et Veryte sommeille;
Droit et Raison
Sont alez aux pardons:
Lez deux premiers
Nul ne les resuelle;
Et lez derniers
Sount corrumpus par dons.

OUT OF FRENCH INTO LATIN

Abstulit atra dies Astraeam; cana Fides sed
Somno pressa jacet; Jus iter arripuit,
Et secum Ratio proficiscens limite longo:
Nemo duas primas evigilare parat;
Atque duo postrema absunt, et munera tantum
Impediunt, nequeunt quod remeare domum.

OUT OF LATIN INTO ENGLISH

Justice now is dead;
Truth with a drowsy head,
As heavy as the lead,
Is lain down to sleep,
And taketh no keep:
And Right is over the fallows
Gone to seek hallows,<234>
With Reason together, 
No man can tell whither:
No man will undertake                                          10
The first twain to wake;
And the twain last
Be withhold so fast
With money, as men sayn,
They cannot come again.

A grant tort,
Foy dort. <235>

Here endeth a right delectable treatise upon a goodly Garland or
Chaplet of Laurel, devised by Master Skelton, Poet Laureate.



NOTES TO THE GARLAND OF LAUREL

1. Sheriff-Hutton Castle "is situated in the Wapentake of Bulmer,
and is distant ten miles north-east from York . . . The slender
accounts of it that have reached our times, ascribe its origin to
Bertram de Bulmer, an English Baron, who is recorded by Camden to
have built it in the reign of King Stephen, A. D. 1140 . . . From
the Bulmers it descended by marriage to the noble family of the
Nevilles, and continued in their possession upwards of 300 years,
through a regular series of reigns, until seized by Edward IV. in
1471, who soon after gave the Castle and Manor to his brother the
Duke of Gloucester, afterwards Richard III. In 1485, in
consequence of the death of Richard at the Battle of Bosworth
Field, it became the property of King Henry VII., and continued in
the hands of the Crown, until James the First granted it to his
son, Prince Charles, about 1616. The Castle and Manor were
subsequently granted (also by King James, according to Camden, and
the original grant confirmed by Prince Charles after he ascended
the throne) to the family of the Ingrams, about 1624-5, and are
now in possession of their lineal descendant, the present
Marchioness of Hertford." Some Account of Sheriff-Hutton Castle,
&c. pp. 3-5, York, 1824.

Leland (who says, erroneously it would seem, that Sheriff-Hutton
Castle "was builded by Rafe Nevill of Raby the first Earl of
Westmoreland of the Nevilles,") gives the following description of
it. "There is a Base Court with Houses of Office afore the
Entering of the Castle. The Castle self in the Front is not
ditched, but it standeth in loco utcunque edito ("in a place where
one can be constructed"). I marked in the forefront of the first
Area of the Castle self 3. great and high Towers, of the which the
Gate House was the Middle. In the second Area there be a 5. or 6.
towers, and the stately Stair up to the Hall is very Magnificent,
and so in the Hall itself, and all the residue of the House: in so
much that I saw no House in the North so like a Princely Lodgings.
I learned there that the Stone that the Castle was builded with
was fetched from a Quarry at Terington a 2. Miles off. There is a
Park by the Castle. This Castle was well maintained, by reason
that the late Duke of Norfolk lay there x. Years, and since the
Duke of Richmond. From Shirhuten to York vij. Miles, and in the
Forest of Galtres, whereof 4. Miles or more was low Meadows and
Marsh Ground full of Carres, the Residue by better Ground but not
very high." Itin. i. 67. ed. 1770.

"Report asserts, that during the civil wars in the time of Charles
the First, it [the Castle] was dismantled, and the greater part of
its walls taken down, by order of the Parliament. But this is
certainly not the fact, as will be seen by reference to the 'Royal
Survey' made in 1624 . . . From this Survey it will appear
evident, that the Castle was dismantled and almost in total ruin
in the time of James I.,-how long it had been so, previous to the
Survey alluded to, is now difficult to say. From the present
appearance of the ruins, it is plain that the Castle was purposely
demolished and taken down by workmen, (probably under an order
from the Crown, in whatever reign it might happen,) and not
destroyed by violence of war. However, since this devastation by
human hands, the yet more powerful and corroding hand of Time has
still further contributed to its destruction. The Castle stands
upon a rising bank or eminence in front of the village, and its
ruins may be seen on every side at a great distance." Some
Account, &c. (already cited), pp. 5, 6. The vast forest of Galtres
formerly extended nearly all round Sheriff-Hutton.

When Skelton wrote the present poem, Sheriff-Hutton Castle was in
possession of the Duke of Norfolk, to whom it had been granted by
the crown for life: see note on v. 769.

2. Eterno mansura die dum sidera fulgent,
Aequora dumque tument, haec laurea nostra virebit:
Hinc nostrum celebre et nomen referetur ad astra,
Undique Skeltonis memorabitur alter Adonis.] "While the stars
shine with eternal day, and while the seas swell, these our
laurels shall be green; our illustrious name shall be translated
to the sky, and everywhere shall Skelton be renowned as another
Adonis." (PH)

3. Encrampished] i.e. encramped. Skelton's fondness for compounds
of this kind has been already noticed. The simple word occurs in
other writers:

"Crampisheth her limbs crookedly."
Chaucer's Annel. and Ar.,-Works, fol. 244. ed 1602.

"As marble cold her limbs crampishing."
Lydgate's Wars of Troy, B. iv. sig. X v. ed. 1555.

4. Thus stood I in the frithy forest of Galtres,
Ensoaked with silt of the miry moss] The forest of Galtres (which,
as already noticed, extended nearly all round Sheriff-Hutton) was,
when Camden wrote, "in some places shaded with trees, in others
swampy." Britannia (by Gough), iii. 20.

5. harts bellowing] In the Book of Saint Albans, Juliana Berners,
treating "Of the crying of these beasts," says,

"An hart belloweth and a buck groaneth, I finde."
Sig. d ii.

6. the hind calf] "Ceruula. a hind calf." Ortus Vocab. fol. ed. W.
de Worde, n. d. In the Book of Saint Albans we are told;

"And for to speak of the harte if ye will it lere:
Ye shall him a Calf call at the first yere."
Sig. C vi.

7. superflue] i.e. superfluous.

"Ye blabbering fools superflue of language."
Barclay's Ship of Fools, fol. 38. ed. 1570.

8. disguised] i.e. decked out in an unusual manner.

"Of his strange array marvelled I sore
. . . . 
Me thought he was gaily disguised at that feast."
Lydgate's Assemble de dyeus, sig. b ii. n. d. 4to.

9. Garnished fresh after my fantasy
Enhatched with pearl, &c.] fresh i.e. elegantly; enhatched i.e.
inlaid, adorned with pearl, &c. Our author in his Phillip Sparrow
tells us that a lady had a wart (or as he also calls it, a scar)
"enhatched on her fair skin," v. 1078. Gifford observes that
"literally, to hatch is to inlay [originally, I believe, to cut,
engrave, mark with. lines]; metaphorically, it is to adorn, to
beautify, with silver, gold, &c." Note on Shirley's Works, ii.
301. "The ladies' apparel was after the fashion of Inde, with
kerchiefs of pleasance, hatched with fine gold." Holinshed's
Chron. (Hen. viii.) vol. iii. 849. ed. 1587. "Hatching, is to
Silver or gild the Hilt and Pommel of a Sword or Hanger." R. 
Holme's Ac. of Armory. 1688. B. iii. p.91.

10. The ground engrosed and bet with bourne gold]-ground, i.e.
(not floor, but) ground work; as in Lydgate's verses entitled For
the better abide;

"I see a ribbon rich and new
 .  .  .  .  .
The ground was all of brent gold bright."
MS. Cott. Calig. A ii. fol. 65.

Bet has here the same meaning as in Le Bone Florence of Rome;

"Her clothes with beasts and birds were bet."
Met. Rom. iii. 9. ed. Ritson,

who somewhat copiously explains it "beaten, plaited, inlay'd,
embroider'd:"

11. To whom supplied the royal Queen of Fame] Opposite this line
MS. has a marginal note, partly illegible, and partly cut off,
"Egida concussit p . . . dea pectore porta . . " (too fragmentary
to attempt a translation).

12. of very congruence] i.e. of very fitness.

"Such ought of duty and very congruence," &c
Barclay's Ship of Fools, fol. 188. ed. 1570
Page 173. v. 54.

13. comprised] i.e orne in mind. Compare our author in L'envoy to
Wolsey, appended to The Doughty Duke of Albany.

"And him most lowly pray,
In his mind to comprise
Those words," &c.
v. 530.


14. pardie, for to kill] i.e. par dieu, verily, for to be killed.

15. the grey] i.e. the badger. Juliana Berners says;

That beast a bauson hight: a brock or a grey:
These three names he hath the sooth for to say."
The Book of St. Albans, sig. D vi.

16. diffuse is to expound] i.e. is difficult to expound: see note
101 to Philip Sparrow.

17. motive] i.e. motion. So in the next line but one is
"promotive," i.e. promotion: and so Lydgate has "imaginative" for-
imagination. Fall of Princes, B. v. leaf cxvii. ed. Wayland.

18. Aeschines] Aeschines (389 - 314 BC) was a Greek statesman and
orator. He and Demosthenes had a long-standing rivalry which was
expressed in several speeches which have survived; in the end
Demosthenes was victorious and Aeschines was forced into exile in
330 BC.

19. apposal] i.e. question.

"And to Poverty she put this apposal."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. leaf lxvi. ed. Wayland.

"Made unto her this uncouth apposal:
Why weep ye so;" &c. Id. B. v. leaf. cxxviii.

well inferred-i.e. well brought in.

20. quickly it is
Touched] i.e. it is lively, subtly expressed: compare v. 592 and
v. 1161, where the words are applied to visible objects.

21. debarred] See note 9 to Magnificence; and compare Gentleness
and Nobility (attributed without grounds to Heywood) n.d.;

"That reason is so great no man can debarr."
Sig. C iii.

22. freshly] i.e. elegantly: "Fresh, gorgeous, gay." Palsgrave,
p.313-which I ought to have cited earlier for the meaning of this
word.

23. outray] i.e. vanquish. See note 10 to Philip Sparrow where
this passage is examined.

24. Jerome, in his preamble Frater Ambrosius, &c.] The Epistle of
Jerome to Paulinus, prefixed to the Vulgate, begins, "Frater
Ambrosius tua mihi munuscula perferens," ("Brother Ambrosius
bringing to me your little gifts") &c., and contains this passage:
"Unde et Aeschines, cum Rhodi exularet, et legeretur illa
Demosthenis oratio, quam adversus eum habuerat, mirantibus cunctis
atque laudantibus, suspirans ait, Quid, si ipsam audissetis
bestiam sua verba resonantem?" ("When the speech of Demosthenes 
against Aeschines was recited before the latter during his exile
at Rhodes, amid all the admiration and applause he sighed: if you
could but have heard the brute himelf deliver his words?") It may
be found also in Hieronymi Opp. I. 1005. ed. 1609.

25. Some facers, some bracers, some make great cracks] See note 4
to Against the Scots.

26. court-rolls].-Warton cites this and the next two verses as
"nervous and manly lines." Hist. of E. P. ii. 354. ed. 4to.

27. a mumming] See note 9 to Colyn Cloute.

28. Jack-a-thrum's bible] See note 57 to Poems against Garnesche.

29. clarioner] Is used here for-trumpeter: but the words properly
are not synonymous;

"Of trumpeters and eke of clarioners."
Lydgate's Wars of Troy, B. i. sig. C v. ed. 1555.

and Skelton himself has afterwards in the present poem, "trumpets
and clarions." v. 1507.

30. Aeolus, your trumpet] i.e. Aeolus, your trumpeter.

"A trumpet stood and proudly gan to blow,
Which slain was and from the tree down throw." 
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. v. leaf cxxx. ed. Wayland.

So Chaucer makes Aeolus trumpeter to Fame: see House of Fame, B.
iii.

31. plump] i.e. cluster, mass. "Stood still as it had been a plump
of wood." Morte d'Arthur, B. i. cap. xvi. vol. i. 27. ed. Southey.
Dryden has the word; and the first writer perhaps after his time
who used it was Sir W. Scott.

32. A murmur of minstrels] So in many of our early English dramas
"a noise of musicians" is used for a company or band of musicians.

33. hairs encrisped] i.e. hairs formed into curls, curling.

34. Daphnes] i.e. Daphne. So our early poets wrote the name;

"A maiden whilom there was one
Which Daphnes hight."
Gower's Conf. Am. B. iii. fol. lvi. ed. 1554.

"Her name was Daphnes which was devoid of love."
The Castle of pleasure, (by Nevil, son of Lord Latimer), sig. A
iii. 1518.

So afterwards in the present poem we find Cidippes for Cydippe, v.
885; and see note 9 to Philip Sparrow.

35. the dart of lead] From Ovid, Met. i. 471.

36. O thoughtful heart] See note 17 to Divers Ballads and Ditties
Solcaious.

37. the tree as he did take
Between his arms, he felt her body quake] From Ovid, Met. i. 553.

38. he assurded into this exclamation]-assurded, i.e. broke forth-
a word which I have not elsewhere met with, but evidently formed
from the not uncommon verb sourd, to rise. "There within sourdeth
and springeth a fontain or well." Caxton's Mirror of the world,
1480, sig. e. v. : in that work, a few lines after, occurs
"resourdeth."

39. Why have the gods showed me this cruelty, &c.] This stanza ia
also imitated from Ovid, Met. i. 521.

40. rayest] i.e. arrayest:-to array is to put into a condition or
plight: see note 1 to Woefully Arrayed.

41. But sith I have lost, &c.] Again from Ovid, Met. i. 557.

42. poets laureate, &c.] It must be remembered that formerly a
poet laureate meant a person who had taken a degree in grammar,
including rhetoric and versification: and that the word poet was
applied to a writer of prose as well as of verse; "Poet, a conning
man." Palsgrave, p. 256.

"And poets to proven it. Porfirie and Plato
Aristotle. Ovidius," &c.
Piers Plowman, p. 210. ed. Whit.

"Nor sugared deties [ditties] of Tullius Cicero."
Lydgate's Life and passion of Saint Albon, sig. B ii. ed. 1534.

43. Esiodus, the iconomicar] i.e. Hesiod, the writer on husbandry
(the eds. by a misprint have "icononucar,"-which Warton says he
"cannot decipher." Hist. of E. P., ii. 352 (note), ed. 4to. Among
MSS. Dig. Bod. 147. is "Carmen Domini Walteri de Henleye quod
vocatur Yconomia sive Housbundria:" ("A song of Lord Walter of
Henley which is called Ecomonia, that is, husbandry") compare
Cicero; "quam copiose ab eo [Xenophonte] agricultura laudatur in
eo libro, qui est de tuenda re familiari, qui Oeconomicus
inscribitur." ("How abundantly agriculture is praised by him
[Xenophon] in that book, entitled Economicus which is about the
preservation of his property"), Cato Major, c. 17.

44. Aulus Gellius] A Latin author and grammarian (c. 125 - after
180 AD). He is famous for his Attic Nights, a commonplace book, or
compilation of notes on grammar, philosophy, history,
antiquarianism and other subjects, preserving fragments of many
authors and works who otherwise might be unknown today (Wikipedia)

45. Horace also with his new poetry] "That is, Horace's Art of
Poetry. Vinesauf wrote De Nova Poetria. Horace's Art is frequently
mentioned under this title." Warton's Hist. of E. P., ii. 353
(note), ed. 4to.

46. Boyce] i.e. Boethius, author of the Consolation of Philosophy.

47. And Maximian, with his mad ditties,
How doting age would jape with young folly.] The Elegiarum Liber
of Maximianus, which has been often printed as the production of
Cornelius Gallus, may be found, with all that can be told
concerning its author, in Wernsdorf's Poetae Latini Minores, tomi
sexti pars prior.("Minor Latin Poets, Volume 6 part 12) In these
six elegies, Maximianus deplores the evils of old age, relates the
pursuits and loves of his youth, &c. &c. Perhaps the line "How
doting age would jape with young folly" (in which case jape would
have the same meaning here as in our author's Mannerly Margery
Milk and Ale, v. 20. is a particular allusion to Elegy v. , where
Maximianus informs us, that, having been sent on an embassy, at an
advanced period of life, he became enamoured of a "Graia puella,"
("Greek girl"), the adventure being described in the grossest
terms.

48. Johan Bochas with his volumes great]. Johan Bochas i.e.
Giovanni Boccaccio. In Skelton's time, the De Genealogia Deorum,
the De Casibus Virorum et Feminarum Illustrium, and other now-
forgotten works of Boccaccio, were highly esteemed,-more, perhaps,
than the Decamerone.

49. Quintus Curtius Rufus] was a Roman historian, probably of the
1st century AD, author of his only known and only surviving work,
Historiae Alexandri Magni, "Histories of Alexander the Great,"
(Wikipedia).

50. Macrobius] Macrobius Ambrosius Theodosius, commonly referred
to as Macrobius, was a Roman who flourished during the early fifth
century. He is primarily known for his writings, which include the
Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis ("Commentary on the Dream of
Scipio"), which was an important source for Platonism in the Latin
West during the Middle Ages (Wikipedia)

51. probate] i.e. proof, meaning, or, perhaps, interpretation. See
note 2 to Magnificence.

52. Poggeus ... with many a mad tale] When this poem was written,
the Facetiae of Poggio enjoyed the highest popularity. In The
Palace of Honour, Gawen Douglas, enumerating the illustrious
writers at the Court of the Muses, says,

"There was Plautus, Poggius, and Persius."
p. 27. ed. Ban. 1827.

53. a friar of France men call Sir Gaguine] Concerning Gaguin, see
Account of Skelton and his Writings.

54. boot is of all bale] i.e. remedy of all evil. See note 176 to
Magnificence.

55. Lucilius] Gaius Ennius Lucilius (c. 180 - 103/2 BC), the
earliest Roman satirist, of whose writings only fragments remain
(Wikipedia).

56. Valerius, Maximus by name] i.e. Valerius who has the name
Maximus (to distinguish him from Valerius Flaccus). Valerius
Maximus was a Latin writer and author of a collection of
historical anecdotes. He worked during the reign of Tiberius (14
AD to 37 AD)

57. Vincentius in Speculo, that wrote noble works] The Speculum
Majus of Vincentius Bellovacensis (naturale, morale, doctrinale,
et historiale), a vast treatise in ten volumes folio, usually
bound in four, was first printed in 1473. See the Biog. Univ. ,
and Hallam's Introd. to the Lit. of Europe, i. 160.

58. Pisandros] "Our author," says Warton, "got the name of
Pisander, a Greek poet, from Macrobius, who cites a few of his
verses." Hist. of E. P., ii. 353 (note), ed. 4to. A mistake:
Macrobius (Sat. v. 2.) mentions, but does not cite, Pisander.

59. these English poets three] "That only these three English
poets [Gower, Chaucer, Lydgate] are here mentioned, may be
considered as a proof that only these three were yet thought to
deserve the name." Warton's Hist. of E. P., ii. 354. ed. 4to. So
the Scottish poets of Skelton's time invariably selected these
three as most worthy of praise: see Laing's note on Dunbar's
Poems, ii. 355.

60. Together in arms, as brethren, embraced] So Lydgate;

"Embraced in arms as they had been knit
Together with a girdle."
Le Assemble de dyeus, sig. d iii. n. d.

61. They wanted nothing but the laurel] Meaning,-that they were
not poets laureate: see note 42 above.

62. The bruited Britons of Brutus Albion]-bruited, i.e. famed. So
Lydgate;

"Rejoice ye folks that born be in Britain,
Called otherwise Brutus Albion."
Fall of Princes, B. viii. fol. viii. ed. Wayland.

Brutus Albion was the mythical founder of Britain. See Layamon's
Brut.

63. I made it strange] i.e. I made it a matter of nicety, scruple.

64. Enlozenged with many goodly plates
Of gold, entached with many a precious stone;] i.e. Having many
goodly plates of gold shaped like lozenges (quadrilateral figures
of equal sides, but unequal angles). Entached may be used in the
sense of-tacked on; but qy. is the right reading "enhatched?" as
in v. 40 of the present poem, "Enhatched with pearl," &c. (see
note 9 above), and v. 1078 of Phillip Sparrow.

65. whale's bone] In our early poetry "white as whale's bone" is a
common simile; and there is reason to believe that some of our
ancient writers supposed the ivory then in use (which was made
from the teeth of the horse-whale, morse, or walrus) to be part of
the bones of a whale. Skelton, however, makes a distinction
between "whale's bone" and the real ivory (see v. 468). The latter
was still scarce in the reign of Henry the Eighth; but, before
that period, Caxton had told his readers that "the tooth of an
elephant is ivory." Mirror of the world, 1480. sig. f i.

66. The carpets within and tapets of pall]-tapets of pall, i.e.
coverings of rich or fine stuff (perhaps table-covers): that
tapets does not here mean tapestry, is proved by the next line;
and compare v. 787,

"With that the tapets and carpets were laId,
Whereon these ladies softly might rest,
The sampler to sew on," &c.

In an unpublished book of King's Payments, in the Chapter-House,
we find, under the first year of Henry 8; "Item to Corneles
Vanderstrete upon his warrant for xv Tapets made for Windows at
the tower-ix s."

67. cloths of Arras] See note 75 to Poems against Garnesche.

68. Floorth] i.e. floor. Planché, the florthe of any thing that is
boarded." Palsgrave, p. 49. "Floorth of a house, astre." Id. p.
221.-"Gyst that goeth over the floorth, soliue, giste." Id. p.
225. "I Plaster a wall or floorth with plaster ... I will plaster
the floorth of my chamber to make a gernyer there, Je plastreray
latre de ma chambre pour en faire ung grenier." Id. p. 660.

69. false quarter] "The false quarters is a soreness on the inside
of the hoofs, which are commonly called quarters, which is as much
as to say, crazed unsound quarters, which comes.from evil shoeing
and paring the hoof." R. Holme's Ac. of Armory, 1688. B. ii. p.
152.

70. I pray you, a little tine stand back] So Heywood;

"For when provender pricked them a little tine," &c.
Dialogue, &c. sig D,-Works, ed. 1598.

71. the bailiffs of the v ports] i.e. the bailiffs of the Cinque
Ports. (Sandwich, Hastings, Rye, Dover and Hythe).

72. ere it be prime] I have my doubts about what hour is here,
meant by prime. Concerning that word see Du Cange's Gloss. in
Prima and Horae Canonicae, Tyrwhitt's Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant.
Tales, Sibbald's Gloss. to Chron. of Scot. Poetry, and Sir F.
Madden's Gloss. to Sir Gawayne, &c.

73. the port salu] See note 155 to Colyn Cloute.

74. As quickly touched] i.e. touched, executed, as much to the
life.

75. Formidanda nimis Jovis &c] MS. Side note here: "Cacosinthicon
(properly Cacosyntheton) ex industria." "Badly made".

The whole of this passage is beyond my comprehension.

Unguibus ire parat loca singula livida curvis: Here Skelton has an
eye to Juvenal;

"Nec per conventus nec cuncta per oppida curvis
Unguibus ire parat nummos raptura Celaeno."
("Not to use the courts in every town to snatch money, like Celaeno
with her hooked talons")
Satires. viii. 129

Spreto spineto cedat saliunca roseto: Here he was thinking of
Virgil;

"Lenta salix quantum pallenti cedit olivae
Puniceis humilis quantum saliunca rosetis."
("The supple willow yields to the pale olive and the lowly Celtic
reed to the rose")
Eclogues. v. 16.

76. haskards] "Haskards went in the quest: not honest men.
Proletarii & capite censi: non classici rem transegerunt."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. n ed. 1530.

"Wine was not made for every haskard."
Copland's High Way to the Spital Hous, Early Pop. Poetry, ii. 33.
ed. Utterson.

- who in the Gloss. queries if haskard mean "dirty fellow? from
the Scotch hasky." [Rough, rude fellows. See Halliwell's Dict.
where "hastarddis," (p. 8. v. 24.) is referred to this word.]

77. Furtherers of love] i.e. pimps, pandars.

78. blow at the coal] A friend suggests that there is an allusion
here to alchemists; but I believe he is mistaken. It is a
proverbial expression. So our author again;

"We may blow at the coal."
Why come ye not to Court, v. 81.

The proverb given by Davies of Hereford;

"Let them that be cold, blow at the coal.
So may a man do, and yet play the fool."
Scourge of Folly,-Proverbes, p. 171.

and by Ray, Proverbs, p. 90. ed. 1768, seems to have a quite
different meaning.

79. gold and whole] Heywood also has this expression;

"In words gold and whole, as men by wit could wish,
She will [lie] as fast as a dog will lick a dish."
Dialogue, &c.-Works, sig H2, ed. 1598.

80. Pole-hatchets] See note 8 to Divers Ballads and Ditties
Solacious.

81. With alleys ensanded about in compass] i.e. "it was surrounded
with sand-walks." Warton's Hist. of E. P., 350 (note), ed. 4to. So
the garden, in which Chaucer describes Cressid walking, was
"sanded all the ways." Troilus and Creseide, B. ii. fol. 152,
Works, ed. 1602: and compare Lydgate;

"All the alleys were made plain with sand."
The Churl and the Bird,-MS. Harl. 116. fol. 147.

82. with singular solace] i.e. in a particularly pleasant manner

83. beat up a fire] i.e. made a fire, (properly, mended).

84. Side note here: Oliva speciosa in campis "An olive tree in the
plains"

85. flagrant flower]-flagrant, i.e. fragrant. Compare v. 978. So
Hawes;

"Strewed with flowers flagrant of air."
The Pastime of pleasure, sig. A a iiii. ed. 1555.

86. Side note here: Nota excellentiam virtutis in oliva "Note the
excellence of virtue in the olive."

87. the nine Muses, Pierides by name] So Chaucer;

"Muses, that men clepe Pierides."
The Man of Law's Prol. v. 4512 (but. see Tyrwhitt's note).

88. Testalis] i.e. Thestylis. So Barclay;

"Neera, Malkin, or lusty Testalis."
Second Egloge, sig. B ii. ed. 1570.

Thestylis (like Phyllis) was a conventional name for a woman in
pastoral poetry. See Theocritus Idyll 2; also Ametas and Thestylis
Making Hay-ropes by Andrew Marvell and L'Allegro by John Milton.

89. twinkling upon his harp strings]-twinkling, i.e. tinkling. So,
at a much later period, Dekker; "Thou (most clear throated singing
man,) with thy Harp, (to the twinkling of which inferior Spirits
skipped like Goats over the Welsh mountains)," &c. A Knight's
Conjuring, 1607. sig. D 2.

90. And Iopas, &c.] Here, and in the next two stanzas, Skelton has
an eye to Virgil;

"Cithara crinitus Iopas
Personat aurata, docuit quae maxumus Atlas.
Hic canit errantem lunam, solisque labores;
Unde hominum genus, et pecudes; unde imber, et ignes;
Arcturum, pluviasque Hyadas, geminosque Triones;
Quid tantum Oceano properent se tinguere soles
Hiberni, vel quae tardis mora noctibus obstet."
Aen. i. 740
("Long-haired Iopas on his gilded lyre fills the chamber with songs
ancient Atlas taught; he sings of the wandering moon and the sun's
travails; whence is the human race and the brute, whence water and
fire; of Arcturus, the rainy Hyades, and the twin Oxen; why wintry
suns make such haste to dip in ocean, or what delay makes the
nights drag lingeringly." (J.W. Mackail).

91. dropping dry] Qy. mistake for dropping eye?

92. Trions] the stars of the Plough.

93. I am not laden of litherness with lumps] i.e. I am not weighed
down by lumps of laziness.

94. Interpolata, que industriosum postulat interpretem, satira in
vatis adversarium]. "An interpolated satire against the poet's
adversary, which demands an industrious interpreter." (PH)

95. Tressis agasonis species &c.] "The first kind is a three-
halfpenny ostler, the second a Davus. He strains at a gnat,
turning his eye aslant and, look, he seizes, snatches at flies!
Whatever Maia cherishes, or Jupiter, or cold Saturn, Sun, Mars,
Venus, and the chill Moon, if you chance to put it in words or
writing, how soon the heart begins to sweat with silent guilt!
Hence he bursts into flames, stirs up this one and that, egging
them on, yet only kindles ineffectual fires, muttering in silence-
let Codrus burst his lungs!" (PH).

96. Tressis agasonis] "Hic Dama est non tressis agaso." ("This
ostler Dama is not worth three coppers") Persius, Sat. v. 76.
Davus is a slave's name in Plautus, Terence, &c.

97. Side note here: Nota Alchimiam et 7 metalla. ("Note Alchemy
and the seven metals")

98. tacita sudant praecordia culpa] "Sweating from the guilt
hidden in his breast" From Juvenal, Sat. i. 167.

99. Labra movens tacitus] "Labra moves tacitus." ("You move your
lips silently") Persius, Sat. v. 184.

100. rumpantur ut ilia Codro] "That Codrus' guts may burst" From
Virgil, Ecl. vii. 26.

101. 17. 4. 7. 2. 17. 5. 18.
18. 19. 1. 19. 8. 5. 12.] This can be decoded to Rogerus Stathum.
See note 44 to Ware the Hawk.

102. Countess of Surrey] Was Elizabeth Stafford, eldest daughter
of Edward Duke of Buckingham, and second wife of Thomas Howard,
Earl of Surrey, who afterwards (on the death of his father in
1524) became the third Duke of Norfolk. She had previously been
attached and engaged to the Earl of Westmoreland with the consent
of both families; but her father, having broken off the intended
match, compelled her to accept the hand of Lord Thomas Howard in
1513. She was twenty years younger than her husband. After many
domestic quarrels, they separated about 1533. Of their five
children, one was Henry Howard, the illustrious poet. She died in
1558. See Memorials of the Howard Family, &c. by H. Howard, 1834,
folio.

The Countess of Surrey appears to have been fond of literature;
and, as she calls Skelton her "clerk," we may suppose that she
particularly patronised him. The probability is, that the present
poem was really composed at Sheriff-Hutton Castle, which as stated
in note 1 above had been granted by the king to the Duke of
Norfolk for life, and that the Countess was residing there on a
visit to her father-in-law. The Garland of Laurel was written, I
apprehend, about 1520, or perhaps a little later: in v. 1192
Skelton mentions his Magnificence, which was certainly produced
after 1515,-see note 1 to that piece.

103. tapets and carpets] See note 66 above.

104. To weave in the stool] So Chaucer;

"And weaven in stool the radevore."
Leg. of Philomene, fol. 195.-Works, ed. 1602.

and Hall; "On their heads bonnets of Damask silver flat woven in
the stool, and therupon wrought with gold," &c. Chron. (Hen.
viii.) fol. vii. ed. 1548.-Mr. Albert Way observes to me that in
Prompt. Parv. MS. Harl. 221, is "Lyncent, working instrument for
silkwomen. Liniarium," while the ed. of 1499 has " Lyncet, a
working stool and he supposes the stool to have been a kind of
frame, much like what is still used for worsted work, but, instead
of being arranged like a cheval glass, that it was made like a
stool,-the top being merely a frame or stretcher for the work.

105. With sleys, with tavells, with hiddles well dressed] sleys,
weavers' reeds; tavels, bobbins used in silk-weaving; "Heddles,
Hedeles, Hiddles, The small cords through which the warp is passed
in a loom, after going through the reed." Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang.
by Jamieson, who cites from G. Douglas's Aeneid;

"With subtle sleys, and her hiddles slee,
Rich lenze webs neatly weaved she."
B. vii. p. 204. 45. ed. Rudd.

106. to embroider put them in press] i.e. put themselves in press
(applied themselves earnestly) to embroider.

107. glowtonn] Does it mean-ball, clue? or, as Mr. Albert Way
suggests,-a sort of needle, a stiletto as it is now called,-
something by which the silk was to be inwrought?

108. pirling] "I pirl wire of gold or silver, I wind it upon a
wheel as silk women do." Palsgrave, p. 658.

109. tuly silk] Richardson in his Dict. under the verb Tew (to
beat skins as part of the process of leather-making) places tewly,
as derived from it, and cites the present passage. But tewly seems
to have nothing to do with that verb. "Tuly colour. Puniceus vel
punicus." ("Purple or pomegranate colour") Prompt. Parv. MS. Harl.
221. In MS. Sloane, 73. fol. 214, are directions "for to make
bokerham, tuly, or tuly thred," where it appears that this colour
was "a manner of red colour as it were of crop madder," that is,
probably, of the tops or sprouts of the madder, which would give a
red less intense or full: the dye was "safflower" (saffron?) and
"ashes of whin balls ybrent;" and a little red vinegar was to be
used to bring the colour up to a fuller red.-For this information
I am indebted to Mr. Albert Way.

110. bottom] "I can make no bottoms of this thread ... glomera."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. t i. ed. 1530.

111. captations of benevolence] Todd gives "Captation (old Fr.
captation, ruse, artifice). The practice of catching favour or
applause; courtship; flattery." Johnson's Dict. Richardson, after
noticing the use of the verb captive "with a subaudition of
gentle, attractive, persuasive means or qualities," adds that in
the present passage of Skelton captation is used with that
subaudition. Dict. in v.

112. Sith ye must needs aforce it by pretence
Of your profession unto humanity] i.e. Since you must needs
attempt, undertake, it by your claim to the profession of
humanity,-humaniores literae, polite literature.

113. Polimites] i.e. Polynices;

" . . his fellow dan Polimites,
Of which the brother dan Ethiocles," &c.
Chaucer's Troilus and Creseide, B. v. fol. 180, Works, ed. 1602,

"Let Polymyte rejoice his heritage."
Lydgate's Story of Thebes, Pars tert. sig. i v. ed. 4to. n. d.

In Greek mythology, Polynices was the son of Oedipus and Jocasta.
Because of a curse put on them by their father Oedipus, the sons
Polynices and Eteocles did not share the rule peacefully and died
as a result by killing each other in a battle for the control of
Thebes.

114. Pamphila, queen of the Greeks' land] "Telas araneorum modo
texunt ad vestem luxumque foeminarum, qua bombycina appellatur.
Prima eas redordiri, rursusque texere invenit in Ceo mulier
Pamphila, Latoi filia, non fraudanda gloria excogitatae rationis
ut denudet foeminas vestis." Plinii Nat. Hist. lib. xi. 26 ("These
insects weave webs similar to those of the spider, the material of
which is used for making the more costly and luxurious garments of
females, known as " bombycina." Pamphile, a woman of Cos, the
daughter of Latos, was the first person who discovered the art of
unravelling these webs and spinning a tissue therefrom; indeed,
she ought not to be deprived of the glory of having discovered the
art of making vestments which, while they cover a woman, at the
same moment reveal her naked charms." (John Bostock. Perseus
Digital Library). Qy. does any writer except Skelton call her a
queen?

115. Thamer also wrought with her goodly hand
Many devices passing curiously] It is plain that Skelton, while
writing these complimentary stanzas, consulted Boccaccio De Claris
Mulieribus: there this lady is called Thamyris (see, in that work,
"De Thamyri Pictrice," cap. liiii. ed. 1539). Her name is properly
Timarete; she was daughter to Mycon the painter; vide Plinii Nat.
Hist.

116. Agrippina] There were several eminent Roman ladies called
Agrippina; it is not clear which one Skelton meant but it can
hardly have been the best-known one, wife of the Emperor Claudius,
who, amongst other crimes, poisoned Claudius and committed incest
with her son Nero. He may have meant the wife of Germanicus,
brother of the Emperor Claudius.

117. lady Elisabeth Howard] Was the third daughter of the second
Duke of Norfolk by his second wife, Agnes Tylney, daughter of Sir
Hugh Tylney, and sister and heir to Sir Philip Tylney of Boston,
Lincolnshire, knight (I follow Howard's Memorials of the Howard
Family,&c.; Collins says "daughter of Hugh Tilney"). Lady
Elizabeth married Henry Ratcliff, Earl of Sussex.

118. Aryna] i.e. perhaps-Irene. In the work of' Boccaccio just
referred to is a portion "De Hyrene C[r]atini filia," ("Of Irene
daughter of Cratinus") cap. lvii.; and Pliny notices her together
with the above-mentioned Timarete.

119. Good Creisseid, fairer than Polexene] See Chaucer's Troilus
and Creseide. Polexene-i.e. Polyxena, the daughter of Priam.

120. lady Mirriell Howard] Could not have been Muriel, daughter of
the second Duke of Norfolk; for she, after having been twice
married, died in 1512, anterior to the composition of the present
poem. Qy. was the Muriel here celebrated the Duke's grandchild,-
one of those children of the Earl and Countess of Surrey, whose
names, as they died early, have not been recorded? Though Skelton
compares her to Cidippe, and terms her "madame," he begins by
calling her "my little lady."

121. Whom Fortune and Fate plainly have discussed]-discussed, i.e.
determined. So again our author in Why come ye not to Court;

"Almighty God, I trust,
Hath for him discussed," &c.
v. 747.

and Barclay;

"But if thou judge amiss, then shall Eacus
(As Poets sayeth) hell thy just reward discuss."
The Ship of Fools, fol. 4. ed. 1570.

and Drayton;

"In vain was valour, and in vain was fear,
In vain to fight, in vain it was to yield,
In vain to fly; for destiny, discussed,
By their own hands or others' die they must."
The Miseries of Queen Margaret, p. 115. ed. 1627.

122. pleasure, delight, and lust] One of Skelton's pleonastic
expressions.

123. to Cydippes, the maid,
That of Acontius, when she found the bill, &c.]-Cydippes; see note
34 above): the bill; i.e. the writing,-the verses which Acontius
had written on the apple.

124. lady Anne Dakers of the South] The wife of Thomas Lord Dacre,
was daughter of Sir Humphrey Bourchier, son of John Lord Berners
and of Elizabeth Tylney, who afterwards became the first wife of
the second Duke of Norfolk.

125. his craft were to seek] i.e. his skill were at a loss.

126. mistress Margery Wentworth] Perhaps the second daughter of
Sir Richard Wentworth, afterwards married to Christopher Glemham
of Glemham in Suffolk.

127. mistress Margaret Tylney] A sister in-law, most probably, of
the second Duke of Norfolk. His first wife was Elizabeth, daughter
and heir of Sir Frederick Tylney of Ashwell-Thorpe, Norfolk,
knight, and widow of Sir Humphrey Bourchier, son of John Lord
Berners: his second wife was Agnes, daughter of Sir Hugh Tylney,
and sister and heir to Sir Philip Tylney of Boston, Lincolnshire,
knight.

128. As Machareus
Fair Canace] Their tale is told in the Conf. Am. by Gower; he
expresses no horror at their incestuous passion, but remarks on
the cruelty of their father, who

"for he was to love strange,
He wold not his heart change
To be benign and favourable
To love, but unmerciable!"
B. iii. fol. xlviii. ed. 1554.

(and see the lines cited in note 137 below). Lydgate (Fall of
Princes, B. i. leaf xxxv. ed. Wayland) relates the story with a
somewhat better moral feeling.

129. Pearl orient] In allusion to her Christian name just
mentioned, "Margaret."

130. Mistress Jane Blennerhasset] Perhaps a daughter of Sir Thomas
Blennerhasset, who was executor (in conjunction with the Duchess)
to the second Duke of Norfolk: see Sir H. Nicolas's Test. Vet. ii.
604.

131. Laodomi] i.e. Laodamia. She was the wife of Protesilaus, a
Greek warrior in the Trojan War. After Protesilaus was killed in
the war he was allowed to return to his wife for only three hours
before returning to the underworld because they had only just
married. Thereafter Laodamia committed suicide by stabbing
herself, rather than be without him.

132. Gentle as falcon] The Falcon gentle, says Turbervile, is so
called "for her gentle and courteous condition and fashions." The
Book of Falconry, &c. p. 26. ed. 1611.

133. hawk of the tower] See note 79 to Magnificence.

134. fair Isaphill] The Hypsipyle of the ancients. She was queen
of Lemnos and when Jason and his Argonauts stopped at the island,
she became his mistress and bore him a child. He vowed eternal
fidelity before sailing away, but soon forgot her.

"Isiphile,
. . . .
She that did in fairness so excel."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. i. leaf xviii. ed. Wayland.

She figures in the Story of Thebes by the same indefatigable
versifier, who there says,

"But to know the adventures all
Of this lady, Isyphyle the fayre,"
(Pars tert. sig. h iiii. n. d. 4to.)

We must have recourse to Boccaccio De Claris Mulieribus (see that
work, cap. xv. ed. 1539).

135. pomander] Was a composition of perfumes, wrought into the
shape of a ball, or other form, and worn in the pocket, or about
the neck (Fr. pomme d'ambre). In the following entry from an
unpublished Book of King's Paymentis from i to ix of Henry viii,
preserved in the Chapter-House, Westminster, pomander means a case
for holding the composition;

"Item to the french queen's servant, that brought a pomander of
gold to the princes, in Re[ward]: xx.s."
(9th year of reign.

136. cassander] Cassia, a spice resembling cinnamon

137. Pasiphae] Lest the reader should be surprised at finding
Skelton compare Mistress Statham to Pasiphae, I cite the following
lines from Feylde's Controversy between a Lover and a Jay (printed
by W. de Worde), n. d., in which she and Taurus are mentioned as
examples of true love;

"Phedra and Theseus,
Progne and Thereus,
Pasiphae and Taurus,
Who liketh to prove,
Canace and Machareus,
Galathea and Pamphylus,
Was never more dolorous,
And all for true love." Sig. B

I may add too a passage from Caxton's Book of Eneidos, &c.
(translated from the French), 1490; "The wife of king Minos of
Crete was named Pasiphae that was a great lady and a fair above
all other ladies of the realm . . . . The queen Pasiphae was with
child by king Minos, and when her time was come she was delivered
of a creature that was half a man and half a bull." Sig. h 6.

138. By Maro] i.e. Virgil, vide Ecl. i. and iii.

139. estate] meaning here-state, raised chair or throne with a
canopy: compare v. 484.

140. There was among them no word then but mum] See note 9 to
Colyn Cloute.

141. byse] Hearne in his Gloss. to Langtoft's Chron. has "bis,
grey, black," [the original signification of the word: see
Ducange, Bisa, and, Gloss. Franc., Bis] with an eye, no doubt, to
the line at p. 230.

"In a marble bis of him is made story."

and Sir F. Madden explains the word "white or grey" in his Gloss.
to Sir Gawain, &c., referring to the line "Of gold, azure, and
byse" in Sir Gawain and The Carle of Carlyle, p. 204. But we also
find "Byce, a colour, azur." Palsgrave, p. 198. "Scriveners write
with black, red, purple, green, blue or byce, and such other."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. Q ed. 1530. "Bize, Blue, Byze, a delicate
Blue." Hohne's Acad. of Arm., 1688. B. p. 145.

142. Envived pictures well touched and quickly] quickly i.e. to
the life; a somewhat pleonastic line, as before, see note 147 to
Magnificence

143. garnished and bound,
Encovered over with gold of tissue fine;
The clasps and bullions &c.] "I had lever have my book sowed in a
forel [in cuculli involucro] than bound in boards, and covered and
clasped, and garnyshed with bullions [umbilicis]." Hormanni
Vulgaria, sig. Q iiii. ed. 1530: bullions, i.e. bosses, studs.

144. worth a thousand pound] An expression found in other early
poets;

"And every boss of bridle and paytral
That they had, was worth, as I would ween,
A thousand pound."
Chaucer's Flower and Leaf,-Works, fol. 345. ed. 1602.

145. balasses] Tyrwhitt (Gloss. to Chaucer's Cant. Tales) explains
Balass to be "a sort of bastard Ruby." Du Cange (Gloss.) has
"Balascus, Carbunculus, cujus rubor et fulgor dilutiores sunt . .
. a Balascia India regione ... dicti ejusmodi lapides pretiosi."
(Balass, A carbuncle with less redness and sparkle . . . they are
from Balascia in India . . . called precious stones") Marco Polo
tells us, "In this country [Balashan or Badakhshan] are found the
precious stones called balass rubies, of fine quality and great
value." Travels, p. 129, translated by Marsden, who in his learned
note on the passage (p. 132) observes that in the Latin version it
is said expressly that these stones have their name from the
country. See too Sir F. Madden's note on Privy Purse Expenses of
the Princess Mary, p. 209.

146. aurum musicum] i.e. aurum musaicum or musivum,-mosaic gold.

147. Side note here: Honor est benefactivae operationis signum:
Pso. Nobilis est ille quem nobilitat sua virtus: Cassianus.
Proximus ille Deo qui scit ratione tacere: Cato. Mors ultima linea
rerum: Horat] "Honor is a sign of the operation of doing good:
Psalms. Noble is he who ennobles his own character: Cassian. He is
next to God, who knows the reason to be silent: Cato. Death is the
end of all things: Horace."

148. in primis] "First"

149. Book of Honorous Estate] i.e. Book of Honourable Estate. Like
many other of the pieces which Skelton proceeds to enumerate, it
is not known to exist.

150. to learn you to die when ye will] A version probably of the
same piece which was translated and published by Caxton under the
title of A little treatise short and abridged speaking of the art
and craft to know well to die, 1490, folio. Caxton translated it
from the French: the original Latin was a work of great celebrity.

151. Side note here: Virtuti omnia parent: Salust. Nusquam tuta
fides: Virgilius. Res est soliciti plena timoris amor: Ovid. Si
volet usus, quem penes, &c.: Horat.] "Everything depends on
talent. Sallust. Faith is safe nowhere. Virgil. Love is a thing
full of anxious fears. Ovid. If custom wishes, in whose power &c.
Horace"

152. Prince Arthur's Creation] Arthur, the eldest son of King
Henry the Seventh, was created Prince of Wales and Earl of
Chester, 1st Oct. 1489: see Sandford's Geneal. Hist. p. 475. ed.
1707.

153. Antomedon] qy. "Automedon"? Automedon was an ancient Greek
poet known from his poems in the Greek Anthology. Twelve epigrams
of his are still extant and he is mentioned by Philippus of
Thessalonica in the proem of his anthology Garland of Philippus.
He is placed from the 1st century B.C to the 1st century A.D
(Wikipedia)

154. Bowge of Court] See above.

155. Side note here: Non est timor ante Dei oculos eorum: Psalmo.
Concedat laurea lingua: Tullius. Fac cum consilio, et in Aeternum
non peccabis: Salomon. "They do not have the fear of God in their
eyes. Psalms. Let laurels yield to eloquence. Cicero. Consider
everything you do and you shall never sin. Solomon."

156. Of Tully's Familiars the translation] Is noticed with praise
in Caxton's Preface to The Book of Eneydos, &c. 1490; see the
passage cited in Account of Skelton and his Writings.

157. The Recule against Gaguin of the French nation]-Recule, Fr.
recueil, is properly-a collection of several writings: it occurs
again in v. 1390; and in Speak, Parrot, v. 232. Concerning Gaguin,
see Account of Skelton and his Writings.

158. Item, the Popinjay, that hath in commendation
Ladies and gentlewomen such as deserved,
And such as be counterfeits they be reserved]-Popinjay, i.e.
Parrot: "Reserved, excepte, sauf." Palsgrave, p. 322.-No part of
Speak, Parrot, answers to this description: but "the Popinjay" is
certainly only another name for Speak, Parrot (see v. 280.); and
Skelton must allude here to some portion, now lost, of that
composition.

159. Side note here: Non mihi sit modulo rustici papilio: Vates.
Dominare in virtuta tua: Pso. Magnificavit eum in conspectu regum:
Sapient. Fugere pudor, verumque, fidesque: In quorum subiere locum
fraudesque, dolique, Insidiaeque, et vis, et amor scleratus
habendi: Ovid. Filia babylonis misera: Psalmo. "Let no country
butterfly serve me as a model. Prophets. He exalted me in the
sight of the king. Wisdom. In the place of which comes fraud,
deceit, treachery, force, and the hateful love of possessions.
Ovid. O daughter of Babylon, have pity. Psalms."

160. Magnificence] See above.

161. Mannerly Mistress Margery Milk and Ale] See above for one of
the "many matters of mirth" which Skelton here says that he "wrote
to her."

162. Side note here: De nihilo nihil fit: Aristotiles: Le plus
displeysant plieser puent. "Nothing can come from nothing.
Aristotle. The most displeasing pleasure stinks(?)."

163. should not craze] i.e. that it should not break.

164. It may well rhyme, but shrewdly it doth accord] shrewdly,
i.e. badly. A copy of verses on Inconsistency by Lydgate has for
its burden,

"It may well rhyme, but it accordeth nought."
MS. Harl. 2251. fol. 26.

165. Patet per versus] "It is clearly shown by the opposite"

166. Hinc puer hic natus, &c.] "Hence, this boy was born, hence
the man's bed was robbed of his lawful spouse; The child was born
of the blood of Delos; I greatly praise him, the boy who will be
the second Apollo; If you ask me how? Such a chaste whore; &c. &c.
&c" 
Side note here: Nota. ("Note")

167. Et reliquae omelia de diversis tractatibus] "And the rest of
the homily from various treatises."

168. Of my lady's grace at the contemplation,
Out of French into English prose,
Of Man's Life the Peregrination,
He did translate, interpret, and disclose] my lady means perhaps
the mother of Henry the Seventh, the Countess of Derby. This
illustrious and excellent lady, on whose death Skelton wrote an
elegy in Latin (not reproduced here), was Margaret Beaufort, born
in 1441, the only child of John Beaufort, Duke of Somerset. Her
first husband was Edmund, Earl of Richmond, who died in 1456, a
little more than a year after their marriage, the sole issue of
which was Henry, afterwards King Henry the Seventh. Her seconf
husband was Sir Henry Stafford, second son of Humphrey, the great
Duke of Buckingham. Her third husband was Lord Thomas Stanley,
afterwards the first Earl of Derby of his name. Having survived
him, as also her son King Henry, she died June 29, 1509, in her
69th year, and was buried in the magnificent chapel then lately
erected in Westminster Abbey.

Warton says that this piece was "from the French, perhaps, of
Guillaume [de Guilleville] prior of Chalis. But it should be
observed that Pynson printed Peregrinatio humani generis, 1508,
4to." Hist. of E. P., ii. 337 (note), ed. 4to. The Pilgrimage of
the Soul translated out of French into English with somwhat of
additions, the year of our lord m.cccc & thirteen, and endeth in
the Vigil of saint Bartholomew Imprinted at Westminster by William
Caxton, And finished the sixth day of June, the year of our lord,
m.cccc.Lxxxi. And the first year of the reign of king Edward the
fifth. fol., was taken from the French of Guillaume de Guilleville
(see Biog. Univ. xix. 169); but, though Skelton was in all
probability an author as early as 1483, there is no reason for
supposing that the volume just described had received any revision
from him. Peregrinatio Humani Generis, printed by Pynson in 4to.,
1508, is, according to Herbert (Typ. Ant. ii. 430. ed. Dibdin),
"in ballad verse, or stanzas of seven lines;" it cannot therefore
be the piece mentioned here by Skelton, which he expressly tells
us was in "prose."

169. The Treatise of the Red Rose] Side note here: Apostolus: Non
habemus hic civitatem manentem, sed futurum perquaerimus. Notat
bellum Cornubiense quod in campestribus et in patentioribus
vastisque solitudinibus prope Grenewiche gestum est. "The apostle:
for we have not here a lasting city: but we seek one that is to
come. (Heb. 13:14) This refers to the Cornish war which was fought
openly in the fields and in the great wasteland almost as far as
Greenwich."

170. Speculum Principis] "Mirror of the Prince". This was a common
title for books of advice to rulers in the Renaissance period. A
piece by Skelton entitled Methodos Skeltonidis Laureati, sc.
Praecepta quaedam moralia Henrico principi, postea Hen. viii.
missa. Dat. apud Eltham. A.D. MDI. was once among the MSS. in the
Library of Lincoln Cathedral, but is now marked as missing in the
Catalogue of that collection, and has been sought for in vain.
Whether it was the same work as that mentioned in the present
passage, I am unable to determine.
Side note here: Erudimini qui judicatis terram: Pso. "Receive
instruction, you that judge the earth. Psalms"

171. The Tunning of Elynour Rumming] See above. Side note here:
Quis stabit mecum adversus operantes iniquitatem? Pso. Arrident
melius seria picta jocis: In fabulis Aesopi. "Who shall stand with
me against the workers of iniquity? Psalms. They smile more at the
serious depiction of a jest. In Aesop's Fables."

172. Colyn Cloute] See above.

173. John Ive, with Ioforth, Jack] In 1511, a woman being indicted
for heresy, "her husband deposed, that in the end of the reign of
King Edward the Fourth, one John Ive had persuaded her into these
opinions, in which she had persisted ever since." Burnet's Hist.
of the Reform., i. 51. ed. 1816. The words "with Ioforth, Jack,"
were perhaps a portion of Skelton's poem concerning this John Ive:
ioforth is an exclamation used in driving horses;

"Harrer, Morelle, ioforth, hyte."
Mactacio Abel,-Towneley Mysteries, p. 9.

174. conveyance] See the long speech of Crafty Conveyance in our
author's Magnificence, v. 1343

175. the Welshman's hose] See note 92 to Colyn Cloute.

176. The umbles of venison, the bottle of wine,
To fair Mistress Anne that should have been sent] Umbles i.e.
parts of the innards of a deer. "Umbles of a deer or beast,
entrailles." Palsgrave, p. 248. And see Sir F. Madden's note, Syr
Gawain, &c. p. 322. A present of wine seems to have been not
uncommon;

"Beds, brooches, and bottles of wine he to the lady sent."
Lydgate's Ballad of A Prioress and her three Wooers,-MS. Harl. 78.
fol. 74.

The "mistress Anne" here mentioned is doubtless the lady to whom
the lines in Womanhood, Wanton, Ye Want are addressed.

Side note here: Implentur veteris Bacchae pinguisque ferinae:
Virgilius. Aut prodesse volunt aut delectare poetae: Horace. "They
refreshed themselves with wine and succulent game. Virgil. Poets
wish either to profit or to please. Horace"

177. Of one Adam all a knave &c.] i.e. Epitaph for John Clerk and
Adam Udersall. (see above). Side note here: Adam, Adam, ubi es?
Genesis. Resp. Ubi nulla requies, ubi nullus ordo, sed sempiternus
horror inhabitat: Job. "Adam, Adam, where are you? Genesis. Reply.
Where there is no rest, and no order, but everlasting horror
dwelleth. Job"

178. Dormiat in pace] "May he sleep in peace"

179. Phillip Sparrow] See above.

180. Side note here: Etenim passer invenit sibi domum: Psalmo.
"For the sparrow hath found herself a house. Psalms."

181. At this point are inserted the lines known as The Addition to
Philip Sparrow, which are printed at the end of that poem.

182. The grunting and the groigning of the groaning swine] See
note 21 to Poems against Garnesche. Side Note here: Porcus se
ingurgitat caeno, et luto se immergit: Guarinus Veronens. Et sicut
opertorium mutabis eos, et mutabuntur: Pso. c. Exaltabuntur cornua
justi: Psalmo. "The pig gorges itself on filth, and wallows in
muck. Guarino da Verona. And as a vesture thou shalt change them,
and they shall be changed. Psalm 100 (sic, actually 101). The
horns of the just shall be exalted. Psalms."

183. Mourning of the Maple-Root] In Ravenscroft's Panonelia, 1609,
part of a nonsensical song (No. 31) is as follows;

"My Lady's gone to Canterbury,
S. Thomas be her boot.
She met with Kate of Malmsbury,
Why weepst thou maple root?"

a recollection perhaps of Skelton's lost ballad.

184. Moses' horns] So Lydgate;

". . . . Moses
With golden horns like Phoebus' beams bright."
Process. of Corpus Christi,-MS. Harl. 2251. fol. 251.

"Cumque descenderet Moses de monte Sinai . . . ignorabat quod
cornuta esset facies sua ex consortio sermonis Domini." ("And when
Moses came down from Mount Sinai . . . he knew not that his face
was horned from the conversation of the Lord." Vulgate,-Exod.
xxxiv. 29.)

185. Of pageants that were played in Joyous Garde] Bale, in his
enumeration of Skelton's writings, alluding to this line (as is
evident from his arrangement of the pieces), gives "Theatrales
ludos." ("Theatrical plays") Script. Illust. Bryt. p. 652. ed.
1557: and Mr. J. P. Collier states that "one of Skelton's earlier
works had been a series of pageants, 'played in Joyous Garde,' or
Arthur's Castle." Hist. of Eng. Dram Poet. ii. 142. But,
assuredly, in the present line, pageants means nothing of a
dramatic nature. The expression to "play a pageant" has occurred
several times already in our author's poems; "I have played my
pageant" (my part on the stage of life), see note 19 to The Death
of King Edward IV; "Such polling pageants ye play "(such thievish
pranks), see note 54 to Poems Against Garnesche; and though it may
be doubted whether the pageants that were played in Joyous Garde,
i.e. in the Castle of Sir Launcelot, according to the romances-are
to be understood as connected with feats of arms, I cite the
following passage in further illustration of the expression;

"The first that was ready to Joust was sir Palomydes and sir
Kaynus le Strange a knight of the table round. And so they two
encountered together, but sir Palomydes smote sir Kaynus so hard
that he smote him quite over his horse's croupe (crupper), and
forthwithal sir Palomydes smote down another knight and brake then
his spear & pulled out his sword and did wonderly well. And then
the noise began greatly upon sir Palomydes. Lo said King Arthur
yonder Palomydes beginneth to play his pageant. So God me help
said Arthur he is a passing good knight. And right as they stood
talking thus, in came sir Tristram as thunder, and he encountered
with sir Kay the Seneschal, and there he smote him down quite from
his horse, and with that same spear sir Tristram smote down three
knights mo, and then he pulled out his sword and did marvellously.
Then the noise and cry changed from sir Palomydes and turned to
sir Tristram and all the people cried O Tristram, O Tristram. And
then was sir Palomydes clean forgotten. How now said Launcelot
unto Arthur, yonder rideth a knight that playeth his pageants."
Morte d' Arthur, B. x. cap. lxxix. vol. ii. 140. ed. Southey.

Side note here: Tanquam parieti inclinato et maceriae depulsae:
Psalmo. Militat omnis amans, et habet sua castra Cupido: Ovid. "As
if you were thrusting down a leaning wall, and a tottering fence.
Psalms. Every lover is a soldier, and Cupid has his own camp."
Ovid.

186. Castle Angel the fenestral] Castle Angel: i.e. the Castel
Sant' Angelo, in Rome. "Anon the pope fled unto Castle Angell."
Cavendish's Life of Wolsey, p. 143. ed.. 1827. Fenestral-Before
the general introduction of glazed windows, their place was
supplied by framed blinds of cloth or canvas, termed fenestrals. .
. . Horman says that "paper or linen cloth streaked across with
lozenges make fenestrals in stead of glazen windows." Harrison,
who wrote his description of England about 1579, . . . states that
glass had become so cheap and plentiful, being imported from
Burgundy, Normandy, and Flanders, as well as made in England, of
good quality, that every one who chose might have abundance."
Way's Prompt. Parv. i. 155.

187. Side note here: Introduxit me in cubiculum suam: Cant. Os
fatuae ebullit stultitiam. Cant. "He brought me into his chamber.
Song of Solomon. The mouth of a fool bubbleth out folly. Song of
Solomon ("fatuae" (of a fool) altered purposely by Skelton from
"fatuorum" (of fools) of the Vulgate Prov. xv. 2 - not Song of
Solomon.)

188. Mock there lost her shoe] A proverbial expression, which
occurs again in our author's Why come ye not to Court, v. 83. In
his Colyn Cloute
we find

"shoe the mockish mare."
v. 181.

189. barbican] "A Barbican, antemurale, promurale, tormentorun
bellicorum sedes, locus." "A bulwark, outwork, Station or place of
artillery." Coles's Dict. "It was generally," says Nares
(referring to King on Anc. Castles, Archael.), "a small round
tower, for the station of an advanced guard, placed just before
the outward gate of the castle yard, or ballium." Gloss. in v. And
see Richardson's Dict. in v.

Side note Here: Audaces fortuna juvat: Virgilius. Nescia mens
hominum sortis fatique futuri: Virgilius "Fortune favours the
bold. Virgil. Men will never know their future fate. Virgil.
("sortis fatique futuri" from "fati sortisque futurae" Aen. x 501)

190. Of Exione, her lambs, &c.] Marshe's ed. has "lamb is"-which
may be the right reading. MS. defective here. If the reader
understands the line, it is more than I do.

191 How dame Minerva first found the olive tree &c.] The words
printed in italics destroy both sense and metre. But they are
found in both eds. MS. defective here.
Side note here: Olaeque Minerva inventrix: Gorgicorum. Atque
agmina cervi pulverulenta [fuga] glomerant: Aenid. iv. "And
Minerva the dicoverer of the olive. Georgics. The deer gather
their column in a cloud of dust. Aeneid book 4."

192. to yearn and to quest] Coles renders both these hunting terms
by the same word, "nicto" (i.e. open, give tongue). Dict.
Turbervile, enumerating "the sundry noises of hounds," tells us
that "when they are earnest either in the chase or in the earth,
we say They yearn." Noble Art of Venery, &c. p. 242. ed. 1611.
"Quest, united cry of the hounds." Sir F. Madden's Gloss. to Sir
Gawaine, &c.

193. With little business standeth much rest]:

"Great rest standeth in little business."
Good Counsel,-Chaucer's Works, fol. 319, ed. 1602.

194. Side note here: Duae molentes in pistrino, una assumetur,
altera relinquetur: Isaias Foris vastabit eum timor, et intus
pavor: Pso. "Two women shall be grinding at the mill: one shall be
taken, and one shall be left. Isiah. Without, fear shall lay him
waste, and terror within. Psalms". (The first quotation is
actually from Matt. xxiv. 41; the second derived from Deut xxxii.
25, which reads Foris vastabit eos gladius, et &c. "The sword
shall lay them waste.")

195. Woefully arrayed] See above. Side note here: Opera quae ego
facio ipsa perhibent testimonium de me: In Evang. &c. "The works
themselves, which I do, give testimony of me. In the Gospel, &c."
(John v. 36)

196. Vexilla regis] i.e. Now Sing We, &c. (see above)

197. Sacris solemniis] As the still-extant piece mentioned in the
preceding line, and headed Vexilla regis, &c., is not a
translation of that hymn, so we may with probability conclude that
this was not a version of the hymn beginning "Sacris solemniis
juncta sint gaudia," ("At this our solemn feast let holy joys
abound" John David Chambers) which may be found in Hymni Ecclesia;
Breviario Parisiensi, 1838. p. 94.

198. Side note here: Honora medicum; propter necessitatem creavit
eum altissimus &c. Superiores constellationes influent in corpora
subjecta et deposita, &c. Nota. "Honour the physician for the need
thou hast of him: for the most High hath created him &c. (Sirach)
The higher constellations influence higher and lower bodies.
Note."

199. Ipocras and Master Avycen] Ipocras i.e. Hippocrates.

"Old Hippocras, Hali, and Gallien."
Chaucer's Prol. to Cant. Tales, v. 433. ed. Tyr.

"For Ipocras nor yet Galien."
Poems by C. Duke of Orleans,-MS. Harl. 682. fol. 103.

Avycen i.e. Avicenna, An Arabian physician of the tenth century.

200. Albumasar] A famous Arabian astrologer, of the ninth century

201. ken] i.e. instruct (pleonastically coupled with "inform," as
in v. 825.

202. Side note here: Spectatum admisse, risis teneatur amor?
Horace. Nota.-A misquotation of Horace Art of Poetry. line 5:
"Spectatum admissi, risum teneatis, amice?" ("Asked to a viewing,
could you stifle laughter, my friends?" A.S. Kline). Qy. Is the
barbarous alteration of this line only a mistake of the printer?

203. Dun is in the mire] A proverbial expression, which occurs in
Chaucer's Manciples Prol. v. 16954. ed. Tyrwhitt, and is common in
writers long after the time of Skelton. Gifford was the first to
show that the allusion is to a Christmas gambol, in which Dun (the
cart-horse) is supposed to be stuck in the mire; see his note on
Jonson's Works, vii. 283.

204. lucerne] i.e. lamp. So in the Lenvoye to Chaucer's Cuckoo and
Nightingale;

"Aurora of gladness, and day of lustiness,
Lucerne a night with heavenly influence
Illumined"
Works, fol. 318, ed. 1602.

Side note here: Lumen ad revelationem gentium: Pso. clxxv (sic,
actually Luc. xi. 32) "A light to the revelation of the Gentiles".

205. Grand juir] "Great rejoicing"

206. Side note here: Velut rosa vel lillium, o pulcherrima
mulierum, &c. Cantat ecclesia. "Like unto a rose or a lily, O most
beautiful of women. The Church sings."

207. But who may have a more ungracious life
Than a child's bird and a knave's wife?]
This proverbial expression occurs in Lydgate;

"Unto purpose this proverb is full rife
Read and reported by old remembrance;
A child's bird and a knave's wife
Have often seen great sorrow and mischance."
The Churl and the Bird,-MS. Harl. 116. fol. 151.

208. Side note here: Notate verba, signate mysteria: Gregori."
Consider the word, mark the mystery. Pope Gregory I.

209. By Mary Gipsy] In much later writers we find, as an
interjection, marry gep, marry gip, marry guep, marry gap.

210. Quad scripsi, scripsi] "What I have written, I have written"
(John xix. 22)

211] Uxor tua, sicut vitis,
Habetis in custodiam,
Custodite sicut scitis,
Secundum Lucam, etc.]
"Your wife, as a fruitful vine,
You have in your care,
guard her as well as you know how,
according to Luke, etc.".
Thy wife, as a fruitful vine-Ps. cxxvii. 3.
according to Luke-Skelton seems here to allude to the Vulgate "et
uxor tua Elisabeth, &c." ("And your wife Elizabeth, &c" Luke i.
13)

212. Of the Bonhams of Ashridge beside Berkhamstead,
 . . . .
Where the sank royal is, Christ's blood so red] The college of the
Bonhommes, completed in 1285, was founded by Edmund, Earl of
Cornwall, son and heir of Richard, Earl of Cornwall, who was King
of the Romans and brother of Henry the Third, for a rector and
twenty brethren or canons, of whom thirteen were to be priests. It
was founded expressly in honour of the blood of Jesus, ("the sank
royal"), which had once formed part of the precious relics
belonging to the German emperors, and which Edmund had brought
over from Germany to England. See Todd's History of the College of
Bonhommes at Ashridge, 1823. p. 1-3.

The pretended blood of Christ drew to Ashridge many persons of all
ranks, greatly to the enrichment of the society. "But," Speed
tells us, "when the sun-shine of the Gospel had pierced through
such clouds of darkness, it was perceived apparently to be only
honey clarified and coloured with saffron, as was openly showed at
Paul's Cross by the Bishop of Rochester, the twenty four of
February, and year of Christ 1538." A Prospect of The Most Famous
Parts of the World, 1631, (in Buck. p. 43).

213. Fraxinus in clivo frondetque viret sine rivo,
Non est sub divo similis sine flumine vivo; "The ash-tree on the
ridge blooms and flourishes without a brook, there is not another
like it under the sky without a living stream." (PH)

"As to the name Ashridge," says Kennett, "it is no doubt from a
hill set with Ashes; the old word was Aescrugge, Rugge, as after
Ridge, signifying a hill or steep place, and the Ashen-tree being
first Aesc, as after Ashche, &c." Parochial Antiquities, p. 302.
ed. 1695.

Side note here: Nota penurium aquae, nam canes ibi hauriunt ex
puteo altissimo. ("Consider the shortage of water, for the dogs(?)
draw it there from the highest well.")

214. The Nation of Fools] Most probably The Book of Three Fools,
(see above)

Side note here: Stultorum infinitus est numerus, &c. Ecclesia.
Factum est cum Apollo essit Corinthi: Actus Apostolorum. Stimulos
sub pectore vertit Apollo: Virgilius. "The number of fools is
infinite. Ecclesiastes. And it came to pass, while Apollo was at
Corinth. Acts of the Apostles. Apollo applies the whip to her
breast. Virgil. (Aeneid Book 6 l. 101)"

215. Apollo that whirled up his chair] Concerning the piece, of
which these were the initial words, a particular notice will be
found in Some Account of Skelton and his Writings: chair, i.e.
chariot; compare the first of the two lines, which in the old eds.
and some MSS. of Chaucer stand as the commencement of a third part
of The Squire's Tale;

"Apollo whirleth up his chair so high."
Works, fol. 25. ed. 1602.

and the opening of The Flower and the Leaf;

"When that Phoebus his chair of gold so high
Had whirled up the starry sky aloft."
Id. fol. 344.

See also Poems by C. Duke of Orleans, MS. Harl. 682. fol. 47.

216. Side note here: Fama repleta malis pernicibus evolat alis,
&c. "Rumour, full of harm and evil, flies on wings."

217. Side note here: Ego quidem sum Pauli, ego Apollo: Corn. "I
indeed am of Paul; and I am of Apollo: Corinthians."

218. ragman rolls] i.e. lists. The collection of deeds in which
the Scottish nobility and gentry were compelled to subscribe
allegiance to Edward I. of England in 1296, and which were more
particularly recorded in four large rolls of parchment, &c., was
known by the name of Ragman's Roll: but what has been written on
the origin of this expression appears to be so unsatisfactory that
I shall merely refer the reader to Cowel's Law Dictionary, &c.,
ed. 1727, in v. , Jamieson's Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang. in v. ,
Nares's Gloss in v. , Gloss. to The Towneley Myst. in v. , Todd's
Johnson's Dict. in v. Rigmarole, [See also Wright's Anecdota
Literaria, and his Glossary to Piers Plowman.]

219. Of the Maiden of Kent called Comfort] Probably one of the
Neville family. Lord George Neville, 3rd Baron Bergavenny, lived
in a house called Comfort, near Cobham in Kent.

220. how Iollas loved goodly Phyllis] Iollas and Phyllis,
conventional names for characters in Pastoral poetry-See Virgil
Eclogues. 
Side note here: Malo me Galatea petit, lasciva puella; Virgilius.
Nec, si muneribus certes, concedat Iollas: 2. Bucol. "Galatea, the
wanton girl, throws an apple at me. Virgil. Nor if you fought with
gifts would Iollas yield. Eclogue 2."

221. Diodorus Siculus of my translation
Out of fresh Latin, &c.] fresh, i.e. elegant: see note 22 above.
This translation from the Latin of Poggio is mentioned with praise
in Caxton's Preface to The Book of Eneydos, &c. 1490, and is still
preserved in MS. among Parker's Collection, in Corpus Ch. College,
Cambridge: see Account of Skelton and his Writings.

222. Side note here: Mille hominum species, et rerum discolor
usus: Horace, Persius v. 52. "Countless the various species of
mankind, and countless the shades which separtate mind from mind.
Horace Persius. v. 52" (William Gifford).

223. Side note here: Millia millium et decies millies centena
millia, &c.: Apocalipsis. Virtute senatum laureati possedent:
Ecclesiastica. Cavit. "Thousands of thousands and tens of
thousands times a hundred thousand, &c. Revelations. Garlanded
virtue occupies the senate. Church Fathers. He is wary." Faukes's
ed., which alone has these marginal notes, has vite for virtute.
The reference "Cauit" ("He is wary") I do not understand.

224. the noise went to Rome] So Chaucer;

"And there came out so great a noise,
That had it stand upon Oise,
Men might have heard it easily
To Rome, I trow sickerly."
House of Fame, B. iii.-Works, fol. 270. ed. 1602.

225. He turned his tirikkis, his volvelle ran fast:] What is meant
by tirikkis, I know not: it occurs again in our author's Speak,
Parrot;

"Some treat of their tirikkis, some of astrology."
v. 139.

Volvelle- For the following note I am indebted to W. H. Black,
Esq. "The volvell is an instrument, called volvella or volvellum
in the Latin of the middle age, consisting of graduated and
figured circles drawn on the leaf of a book, to the centre of
which is attached one movable circle or more, in the form of what
is called a geographical clock. There is a very fine one, of the
fourteenth century, in the Ashmolean MS. 789. f. 363, and others
exist in that collection, which affords likewise, in an
Introduction to the Knowledge of the Calendar, (in the MS. 191.
iv. art. 2. f. 199,) written in old English of the fifteenth
century, a curious description of the volvell, with directions for
its use. The passage is entitled The Rule of the Volvell:-Now
followeth here the volvelle, that some men clepen a lunarie; and
thus must ye govern you therin. First take the greatest circle
that is made in the leaf, for that showeth the 24 hours of the day
natural, that is of the night and day, of the which the first hour
is at noon between 12 and one. Then above him is another circle,
that hath writ in hem the 12 months with her days, and 12 signs
with her degrees; and within that, there is writen a rule to know
when the sun ariseth and the moon both; if ye behold well these
numbers writen in red, 8. 7. 6. 5. 4. +. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.' The rule
proceeds to show that there is another row of the same figures in
black, and that the red cross stands in the place of Cancer, the
black at Capricorn: the red figures were used to show the rising
of the sun and moon, the black for their set ting. Over this is
'another circle that hath a tongue,' (or projecting angle to point
with,) the figure of the sun on it, and 291/2 days figured, for the
age of the moon. Upon this is the least circle, 'which hath a
tongue with the figure of the moon on it, and within it is an
hole, the which showeth by similitude how the moon waxeth and
waneth.' It was used by setting 'the tongue of the moon' to the
moon's age, and 'the tongue of the sun' to the day of the month,
then moving the circle of months and signs to bring the hour of
the day to the last named tongue, 'whereby might be found' in what
sign he' (the moon, masculine in Anglo-Saxon) 'sitteth and the sun
also, and in what time of the day they arisen, any of hem, either
gone down, and what it is of the water, whether it be flood or
ebb.' The rule concludes by observing that the wind sometimes
alters the time of the tide 'at London bridge.'"

226. Mens tibi sit consulta, &c.] "Your mind must be consulted,
you say? Well, consult your mind; Let it emulate Janus, looking
behind and before." (PH)
Side note here: Vates. "The prophet"

227. Skeltonis alloquitur librum suum] "Skelton addresses his own
book."

228. Ite, Britannorum lux, &c.] "Go, radiant light of the Britons,
make known our songs, your worthy British Catullus. Say Skelton
was your Adonis; say Skelton was your Homer; though foreign, you
now run an equal race with Latin verse. And though the greater
part is woven of British words, our Thalia is not too uncouth, nor
my Calliope too unlearned. Nor should you be sorry to receive
wounds from spears or endure the attacks of mad dogs; for great
Virgil bore the brunt of similar threats, and Ovid's muse was not
exempt." (PH-mostly; he omits the line Nec vos poeniteat livoris
tela subire " Nor should you be sorry to receive wounds from
spears").

229. Any word defaced] i.e. Any disfigured, deformed, unseemly
word.

230. Ad serenissimam Majestatem Regiam, pariter cum Domino
Cardinali, Legato a latere honorificatissimo, &c.] "To His Most
Serene Royal Majesty, together with the Lord Cardinal, the most
honourable Legate a latere &c."

231. L'autre Envoy] Concerning this curious Envoy, see Account of
Skelton and his Writings.

232. Perge, liber, &c.] "Go, book, fall before the great King
Henry VIII and worship him, re-echoing his glories. Greet
likewise, with reverence, the great Cardinal, legate a Latere, and
may he be mindful to sue for the prebend which he promised to
entrust to me some day, and give me grounds to hope for his
protection-between hope and fear." (PH).

233. ADMONET SKELTONIS &c.]

"SKELTON EXHORTS ALL TREES, ACCORDING TO THEIR KIND, TO GIVE THEIR
FOLIAGE TO THE LAUREL.

"The ash in the wood, the rowan high on the mountain, the poplar
by the river, the fir, the farthest-spreading beech, the pliable
willow, the plane, the fig-tree bearing its plump fruit, the oak,
the pear-tree with its edible fruit, the lofty pine oozing balsam,
the oleaster, Minerva's olive-tree, the juniper, the box, the
spiny flexible mastic-tree, the grape-vine, king of trees, which
we have from the generosity of lord Bacchus, the wild vine, barren
and hated by the countryman, the Sabaean frankincense tree oozing
its sweet-smelling incense, as also does the most famous Arabian
myrrh-tree, and you, O fragile hazel, and the low-growing
tamarisk, and you, O fragrant cedar, and also you, the myrtle,
trees of every kind, give your foliage to the laurel!
Take this in good part. 	The Laurel."

These Latin lines, with the copy of French verses which follow
them, and the translations of it into Latin and English, are from
Faukes's ed.-where, though they have really no connexion with The
Garland of Laurel, they are considered as a portion of that poem, 
see the colophon; collated with Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works,
1568,-where they occur towards the end of the vol., the last three
placed together, and the first a few pages after.-Marshe's ed.
"Admonito Skeltonis ut omnes Arbores viridi Laureo concedant."

234. Gone to seek hallows]-hallows, i.e. saints.

"On pilgrimage then must they go,
To Wilsdon, Barking, or to some hallows."
The School House of Women, 1572,-Utterson's Early Pop. Poetry, ii.
66.

But "to seek hallows "seems to have been a proverbial expression;

"O many woman hath caught be in a train,
By going out such hallows for to seek."
Lydgate's Wars of Troy, B. ii. sig. I ii. ed. 1555.

235. A grant tort,
Foy dort.] "Slept through great wrongs"



SPEAK, PARROT

[From the ed. by Lant of Certain books compiled by master skelton,
&c. n.d., collated with the same work ed. Kynge and Marche, n.d.,
and ed. Day n.d.; with Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568, and
with a MS. in the Harleian Collection, 2533. Fol. 133, which has
supplied much not given in the printed copies, and placed between
brackets in the present edition. The marginal notes are found only
in MS.]

<1>

THE BOOK COMPILED BY MASTER SKELTON, POET LAUREATE, CALLED SPEAK,
PARROT.

[Lectoribus auctor recipit opusculi hujus auxesim.
Cresecet in immensum me vivo pagina praesens;
Hinc mea dicetur Skeltonidis aurea fama.<2>

Parrot.]

MY name is Parrot, a bird of Paradise,<3>
By nature devised of a wondrous kind,
Daintily dieted with divers delicate spice,
Till Euphrates, that flood, driveth me into Inde;<4>
Where men of that country by fortune me find,
And send me to great ladies of estate;
Then Parrot must have an almond<5> or a date:

A cage curiously carven, with silver pin,<6>                   10
Properly painted, to be my coverture;
A mirror of glass, that I may toot therein;
These, maidens full meekly with many a diverse flower;
Freshly they dress, and make sweet my bower,
With Speak, Parrot, I pray you! full curteously they say:
Parrot is a goodly bird, a pretty popinjay!

With my beak bent my little wanton eye,<7>
My feathers fresh as is the emerald green,<8>
About my neck a circlet like the rich ruby,
My little legs, my feet both feat and clean,                   20
I am a minion to wait upon a queen;
My proper Parrot, my little pretty fool;<9>
With ladies I learn, and go with them to school.

Ha, ha, ha, Parrot, ye can laugh prettily!
Parrot hath not dined all this long day:
Like your puss cat, Parrot can mute and cry
In Latin, Hebrew, Araby and Chaldy;<10>
In Greek tongue Parrot can both speak and say,
As Persius, that poet, doth report of me,
Quis expedivit psittaco suum chaire?<11>                       30

Douce French of Paris Parrot can learn,<12>
Pronouncing my purpose after my property<13>,
With Parlez bien, Parrot, ou parlez rien;<14>
With Dutch, with Spanish, my tongue can agree;
In English to God Parrot can supply,
Christ save King Henry viii, our royal king,
The red rose in honour to flourish and spring!

With Katherine incomparable, our royal queen also,<15>
That peerless pomegranate, Christ save her noble grace!
Parrot, saves habler Castiliano, <16>                          40
With fidasso di cosso in Turkey and in Thrace;<17>
Vis consilii expers, as teacheth me Horace,
Mole ruit sua,<18> whose dicts are pregnant,
Soventez foys, Parrot, en souvenante.<19>

My lady mistress, Dame Philology,<20>
Gave me a gift, in my nest when I lay,
To learn all language, and it to speak aptly:
Now pandez mory, wax frantic, some men say,
Phronesis for phrenesis may not hold her way.
An almond now for Parrot,<21> delicately dressed;              50
In Salve festa dies, toto <22> there doth best.

Moderata juvant,<23> but toto doth exceed;
Discretion is mother of noble virtues all;
Myden agan<24> in Greek tongue we read;
But reason and wit wanteth their provincial
When wilfulness is vicar general.
Haec res acu tangitur, Parrot, par ma foy:<25>
Ticez vous, Parrot, tenez vous coye.<26>

Busy, busy, busy, and business again!
Que pensez voz,<27> Parrot? what meaneth this business?        60
Vitulus<28> in Horeb troubled Aaron's brain,
Melchizedek merciful made Moloch merciless;
Too wise is no virtue, too meddling, too restless;
In measure is treasure, cum sensu maturato;<29> 
Ne tropo sanno, ne tropo mato.<30>

Aram was fired with Chaldee's fire called Ur;
Jobab was brought up in the land of Hus;<31>
The lineage of Lot took support of Assur;
Jereboseth is Hebrew, who list the cause discuss.
Peace, Parrot, ye prate as ye were ebrius:<32>                 70
Howst thee, lyver god van hemrik, ich seg;<33>
In Popering grew pears <34> when Parrot was an egg.

What is this to purpose? Over in a whinny Meg!<35>
Hob Lobin of Lowdeon<36> would have a bit of bread;
The gibbet of Baldock<37> was made for Jack Leg;
An arrow unfeathered and without an head,
A bagpipe without blowing standeth in no stead:
Some run too far before, some run too far behind,
Some be too churlish, and some be too kind.

Ich dien<38> serveth for the ostrich feather,                  80
Ich dien is the language of the land of Beme;<39>
In Afric tongue byrsa<40> is a thong of leather;
In Palestina there is Jerusalem.
Colostrum<41> now for Parrot, white bread and sweet cream!
Our Thomasen she doth trip, our jennet she doth shale:
Parrot hath a black beard and a fair green tail.

Moryshe mine own shelf!<42> the costermonger sayeth,
Fate, fate, fate, ye Irish waterlag;<43>
In flattering fables men find but little faith,
But moveatur terra, let the world wag;                         90
Let Sir Wrigwrag wrestle with Sir Delarag;<44>
Every man after his manner of ways,
Pawbe une arver,<45> so the Welchman says.

Such shreds of sentence, strewed in the shop
Of ancient Aristippus and such other mo,
I gather together and close in my crop,
Of my wanton conceit, unde depromo
Dilemmata docta in paedagogio
Sacro vatem,<46> whereof to you I break:
I pray you, let Parrot have liberty to speak.                 100

But ware the cat, Parrot, ware the false cat!
With Who is there? a maid? Nay, nay, I trow:
Ware riot, Parro,! ware riot, ware that!
Meat, meat for Parrot, meat I say, how!
Thus diverse of language by learning I grow:
With Buss me, sweet Parrot, buss me, sweet sweet:
To dwell among ladies Parrot is meet.

Parrot, Parrot, Parrot, pretty popinjay!
With my beak I can pick my little pretty toe.
My delight is solace, pleasure, disport, and play;<47>        110
Like a wanton, when I will, I reel to and fro:
Parrot can say Caesar, ave <48> also;
But Parrot hath no favour to Esebon:<49>
Above all other birds, set Parrot alone.

Ulula, Esebon, for Jeremy doth weep!
Sion is in sadness, Rachel ruely doth look;
Madionita Jethro, our Moses keepeth his sheep;
Gideon is gone, that Zalmane undertook,
Horeb et Zeb, of Judicum read the book.<50>
Now Geball, Ammon, and Amaloch-hark, hark!                    120
Parrot pretendeth to be a Bible clerk.

O Esebon, Esebon! to thee is come again
Seon, the regent Amorraeorum,
And Og, that fat hog of Bashan, doth retain
The crafty coistronus Cananaeorum:<51>
And asylum, whilom refugium miserorum,<52>
Non fanum, sed profanum,<53> standeth in little stead:
Ulula, Esebon, for Jephthah is stark dead!

Esebon, Marylebone, Whetstone next Barnet;
A trim-tram<54> for an horse-mill it were a nice thing;       130
Dainties for damoiselles, chaffer far-fet:
Bo ho doth bark well, but Hough ho he ruleth the ring;
From Scarpary<55> to Tartary renown therein doth spring,
With He said, and We said, ich wot now what ich wot,
Quod magnus est dominus Judas Iscariot.<56>

Ptolemy and Haly<57> were cunning and wise
In the volvelle, in the quadrant, and in the astroloby,
To prognosticate truly the chance of Fortune's dice;
Some treat of their tirrikis, some of astrology,<58>
Some pseudo-propheta with chiromancy:                         140
If Fortune be friendly, and grace be the guide,
Honour with renown will run on that side.

Monon calon agaton,
Quod Parrato
In Graeco.<59>

Let Parrot, I pray you, have liberty to prate,
For aurea lingua Graeca<60> ought to be magnified,
If it were conned perfectly, and after the rate,
As lingua Latina, in school matter occupied,<61>
But our Greeks their Greek so well have applied,              150
That they cannot say in Greek, riding by the way,
Ho, hostler, fetch my horse a bottle of hay!

Neither frame a syllogism in phrisesomorum,<62>
Formaliter et Graece, cum medio termino:<63>
Our Greeks wallow in the wash-bowl Argolicorum;<64>
For though ye can tell in Greek what is phormio,
Yet ye seek out your Greek in Capricornio;
For they<65> scrape out good scripture, and set in a gall,
Ye go about to amende, and ye mar all.

Some argue secundum quid ad simpliciter,<66>                  160
And yet he would be reckoned pro Areopagita;<67>
And some make distinctions multiplicita,<68>
Whether ita were before non, or non before ita,
Neither wise nor well-learned, but like hermaphrodita:
Set sophia<69> aside, for every Jack Raker<70>
And every mad meddler must now be a maker.

In Academia Parrot dare no problem keep,
For Graece fari<71> so occupieth the chair
That Latinum fari<72> may fall to rest and sleep,
And syllogisari was drowned at Stourbridge Fair;<73>          170
Trivials and quatrivials<74> so sore now they appair,
That Parrot the popinjay hath pity to behold
How the rest of good learning is roufled up and trolled.

Albertus de modo significandi,<75>
And Donatus<76> be driven out of school;
Priscian's head broken now handy-dandy,
And Inter didascolos<77> is reckoned for a fool;
Alexander,<78> a gander of Menander's pool,<79>
With Da Cansales,<80> is cast out of the gate,
And Da Racionales<81> dare not shew his pate.                 180

Plauti in his comedies a child shall now rehearse,
And meddle with Quintilian in his Declamations,
That Petty Caton<82> can scantly construe a verse,
With Aveto in Graeco,<83> and such solemn salutations,
Can scantly the tenses of his conjugations;
Setting their minds so much on eloquence,
That of their school matters lost is the whole sentence.<84>

Now a nutmeg, a nutmeg, cum gariopholo,<85>
For Parrot to pick upon, his brain for to stable,             190
Sweet cinnamon-sticks and pleris cum musco.<86>
In Paradise, that place of pleasure perdurable,
The progeny of Parrots were fair and favourable;
Now in valle Hebron Parrot is fain to feed:
Christ-Cross and Saint Nicholas, Parrot, be your good speed!

The mirror that I toot in, quasi diaphanum,<87>
Vel quasi speculum, in aenigmate,<88>
Elencticum, or else enthymematicum,<89>
For logicians to look on, somewhat sophistice:
Rhetoricians and orators in fresh humanity,<90>
Support Parrot, I pray you, with your suffrage ornate,        200
Of confuse tantum<91> avoiding the checkmate.

But of this supposition that called is art,
Confuse distributive,<92> as Parrot hath devised,
Let every man after his merit take his part,
For in this process Parrot nothing hath surmised,
No matter pretended, nor nothing enterprised,
But that metaphora, allegoria with all,
Shall be his protection, his pavis, and his wall.

For Parrot is no churlish chough, nor no flecked pie,
Parrot is no pendugum, that men call a carling,
Parrot is no woodcock, nor no butterfly,                      210
Parrot is no stammering stare, that men call a starling;
But Parrot is my own dear heart and my dear darling;
Melpomene, that fair maid, she burnished his beak:
I pray you, let Parrot have liberty to speak.

Parrot is a fair bird for a lady;
God of His goodness him framed and wrought;
When Parrot is dead, she doth not putrefy:
Yea, all things mortal shall turn unto nought,
Except man's soul, that Christ so dear bought;                220
That never may die, nor never die shall:
Make much of Parrot, the popinjay royal.

For that peerless Prince that Parrot did create,
He made you of nothing by his majesty:
Point well this problem that Parrot doth prate,
And remember among how Parrot and ye
Shall leap from this life, as merry as we be;
Pomp, pride, honour, riches, and worldly lust,
Parrot sayeth plainly, shall turn all to dust.

Thus Parrot doth pray you,                                    230
With heart most tender,
To reckon with this recueil now,
And it to remember.

Psittacus, ecce, cano; nec sunt mea carmina Phoebo
Digna scio; tamen est plena camena deo.<93>

Secundum Skeltonida famigeratum,
In Piereorum catalogo numeratum.<94>
Itaque consolamini invicem in verbis istis &c.<95>
Candidi lectores, callide callete; vestrum fovete Psittacum,
&c.<96>

[GALATHEA <97>

Speak, Parrot, I pray you, for Mary's sake,
What moan he made when Pamphilus lost his make.<98>

PARROT

My proper Bess,                                               240
My pretty Bess,
Turn once again to me:<99>
For sleepest thou, Bess,
Or wakest thou, Bess,
Mine heart it is with thee.

My daisy delectable,
My primrose commendable,
My violet amiable,<100>
My joy inexplicable,
Now turn again to me.                                         250

I will be firm and stable,
And to you serviceable,
And also profitable,
If ye be agreeable
To turn again to me,
My proper Bess.

Alas, I am disdained,<101>
And as a man half maimed, 
My heart is so sore pained!
I pray thee, Bess, unfeigned,                                 260
Yet come again to me!

By love I am constrained
To be with you retained,
It will not be refrained:
I pray you, be reclaimed,
And turn again to me,
My proper Bess.
Quod Parrot, the popinjay royal.

Martialis cecinit carmen, fit mihi scutum
Est mihi lasciva pagina, vita proba.<102>]

GALATHEA

Now kus me, Parrot, kus me, kus, kus, kus:
God's blessing light on thy sweet little mus!                 270

Vita et anima,
Zoe kai psyche. <103>

Concumbunt Graece. Non est hic sermo pudicus.<104>

Ergo
Attica dictamina
Sunt plumbi lamina,
Vel spuria vitulamina:
Avertat haec Urania! <105>
[Amen]

Amen, Amen,
And set to a D,
And then it is Amend
Our new found A.B.C.
Cum caeteris paribus.<106>

LENVOY PRIMERE<107>

Go, little quaire, named the Popinjay,                        280
Home to resort Jerubbesheth <108> persuade;
For the cliffs of Scalop they roar wellaway,
And the sands of Cefas begin to waste and fade,
For replication restless that he of late there made;
Now Neptune and Aeolus are agreed of likelihood,
For Titus at Dover abideth in the road;

Lucina she wadeth among the watery floods,
And the cocks begin to crow against the day;
Le tonsan de Jason <109> is lodged among the shrouds,
Of Argus revenged, recover when he may;                       290
Lyacon<110> of Libyk and Lydy hath caught his prey:
Go, little quaire, pray them that you behold
In their remembrance ye may be enrolled.

Yet some fools say that ye are furnished with knacks,
That hang together as feathers in the wind;
But lewdly are they lettered that your learning lacks,<111>
Barking and whining, like churlish curs of kind,<112>
For who looketh wisely in your Works may find
Much fruitful matter: but now, for your defence
Again all remords,<113> arm you with patience.                300

MONOSTICHON <114>

Ipse sagax aequi ceu verax nuntius ito.
Morda puros mal desires. Portugues.
Penultimo die Octobris, 33°. <115>

SECOND LENVOY

Pass forth, Parrot, towards some passenger,
Require him to convey you over the salt foam;
Addressing yourself, like a sad messenger,
To our sullen seigneur Sadoc<116>, desire him to come home,
Making his pilgrimage by Nostre Dame de Crome.<117>
For Jerico and Jersey shall meet together as soon
As he to exploit the man out of the moon.<118>

With porpoise and grampus he may feed him fat,
Though he pamper not his paunch with the great seal:          310
We have longed and looked long time for that,
Which causeth poor suitors have many a hungry meal:
As president and regent he ruleth every deal.
Now pass forth, good Parrot, our Lord be your steed,
In this your journey to prosper and speed!

And though some disdain you, and say how ye prate,
And how your poems are barren of polished eloquence,
There is none that your name will abrogate
Than noddypolls and gramatolls of small intelligence;
Too rude is their reason to reach to your sentence:           320
Such melancholy mastiffs and mangy cur dogs
Are meet for a swineherd to hunt after hogs.

MONOSTICHON <114>

Psittace, perge volans, fatuorum tela retundas.
Morda puros mal desires. Portugues.
In diebus Novembris,
34.<119>

LE DEREYN<120> LENVOY

Prepare you, Parrot, bravely your passage to take,
Of Mercury under the trinal aspect,
And sadly salute our sullen sire Sydrake,<121>
And show him that all the world doth conject,
How the matters he mells in come to small effect;
For he wanteth of his wits that all would rule alone;
It is no little burden to bear a great mill-stone:            330

To bring all the sea into a cherry-stone pit,<122>
To number all the stars in the firmament,
To rule ix. realms by one man's wit,
To such things impossible reason cannot consent:
Much money, men say, there madly he hath spent-
Parrot, ye may prate this under protestation,
Was never such a senator since Christ's incarnation.
Wherefore he may now come again as he went,
Non sine postica sanna,<123> as I trow,
From Calais to Dover, to Canterbury in Kent,                  340
To make reckoning in the resset how Robin lost his bow,
To sow corn in the sea-sand, there will no crop grow.
Though he be taunted, Parrot, with tongues attainted,
Yet your problems are pregnant, and with loyalty acquainted.

MONOSTICHON<114>

I, properans Parrote, malas sic corripe linguas.
Morda puros mal desires. Portugues.
15 Kalendis Decembris,
34.<124>

DISTICHON MISERABILE <125>

Altior, heu, cedro, crudelior, heu, leopardo!
Heu, vitulus bubali fit dominus Priami! <126>

Tetrastichon-Unde species Priami est digna imperio.<127>

Non annis licet et Priamus sed honore voceris:
Dum foveas vitulum, rex, regeris, Britonum;
Rex, regeris, non ipse regis: rex inclyte, calle;             350
Subde tibi vitulum, ne fatuet nimium.<128>

God amend all,
That all amend may!
Amen, quoth Parrot,
The royal popinjay.
Kalendis Decembris,<129>
34.

LENVOY ROYAL

Go, proper Parrot, my popinjay,
That lords and ladies this pamphlet may behold,
With notable clerkes: supply to them, I pray,
Your rudeness to pardon, and also that they wold
Vouchsafe to defend you against the brawling scold,           360
Called Detraction, encankered with envy,
Whose tongue is attainted with slanderous obloquy.

For truth in parable ye wantonly pronounce,
Languages divers, yet under that doth rest
Matter more precious than the rich jacounce,
Diamonde, or ruby, or balass of the best,
Or Indy sapphire with orient pearls dressed:
Wherefore your remorders are mad, or else stark blind,
You to remord erst ere they know your mind.

DISTICHON<130>

I, volitans, Parrote, tuam moderare Minervam:                 370
Vix tua percipient, qui tua teque legent.<131>

HYPERBATON

Psittacus hi notus seu Persius est puto notus,
Nec reor est nec erit licet est erit.<132>

Maledite soit bouche malheureuse!<133>
34.

LAUCTURE DE PARROT

O my Parrot, O unice dilecte, votorum meorum
Omnis lapis, lapis pretiosus operimentum tuum!<134>

PARROT

Sicut Aaron populumque, sic bubali vitulus, sic bubali vitulus,
sic bubali vitulus.<135>

Thus much Parrot hath openly expressed:
Let see who dare make up the rest.

Le Popinjay s'en va complaindre:<136>

Helas! I lament the dull abused brain,
The infatuate fantasies, the witless wilfulness
Of one and other at me that have disdain:
Some say, they cannot my parables express;
Some say, I rail at riot reckless;                            380
Some say but little, and think more in their thought,
How this process I prate of, it is not all for nought.

O causeless cowards, O heartless hardiness!
O manless manhood, enfainted all with fear!
O cunning clergy, where is your readiness
To practise or postil this process here and there?
For dread ye dare not meddle with such gear,
Or else ye pinch courtesy, truly as I trow,
Which of you first dare boldly pluck the crow.<137>

The sky is cloudy, the coast is nothing clear;                390
Titan hath trussed up his tresses of fine gold;
Jupiter for Saturn dare make no royal cheer;
Lyacon laugheth thereat, and beareth him more bold;
Rachel, ruely ragged, she is like to catch cold;
Moloch, that maumet, there dare no man withsay;
The rest of such reckoning may make a foul fray.

Dixit, quod Parrot, the royal popinjay.


C'est chose malheureuse,
Que mall bouche.<138>

PARROT

Jupiter ut nitido deus est veneratus Olympo;
Hic coliturque deus.                                          400
Sunt data thura Jovi, rutilo solio residenti;
Cum Jove thura capit.
Jupiter astrorum rector dominusque polorum,
Anglica sceptra regit. <139>

GALATHEA

I compass the conveyance unto the capital
Of our clerk Cleros, whither, thither, and why not hither?
For pass a pace apace is gone to catch a moll,<140>
Over Scarpary mala vi,<141> Monsire Cy and slither:
What sequel shall follow when pendugums meet together?
Speak, Parrot, my sweet bird, and ye shall have a date,       410
Of franticness and foolishness which is the great state?

PARROT

Difficile it is to answer this demand:
Yet, after the sagacity of a popinjay,-
Franticness doth rule and all thing command;
Wilfulness and brainless now rule all the ray;
Again frantic frenzy there dare no man say nay,
For franticness and wilfulness, and brainless ensemble,
The nebs of a lion they make to treat and tremble;

To jumble, to stumble, to tumble down like fools,
To lour,<142> to droop, to kneel, to stoop, and to play couch
quail,<143>                                                   420
To fish afore the net and to draw pools;
He maketh them to bear baubles, and to bear a low sail;
He carrieth a king in his sleeve, if all the world fail;
He faceth out at a flush,<144> with Show, take all!
Of Pope Julius' cards he is chief cardinall.

He triumpheth, he trumpeth, he turned all up and down,
With Skyrgaliard, proud palliard, vauntparler, ye prate!<145>
His wolf's head, wan, blo as lead, gapeth over the crown;
It is to fear lest he would wear the garland on his pate,
Paregal with all princes far passing his estate;              430
For of our regent the regiment he hath, ex qua vi,
Patet per versus, quod ex vi bolte harvi.<146>

Now, Galathea, let Parrot, I pray you, have his date;
Yet dates now are dainty, and wax very scant,
For grocers were grudged at and groined at but late;
Great raisins with reasons be now reprobitant,
For raisins are no reasons, but reasons currant.<147> 
Run God, run Devil! yet the date of our Lord
And the date of the Devil doth shrewdly accord.

Dixit, quod Parrot, the popinjay royal.

GALATHEA

Now, Parrot, my sweet bird, speak out yet once again,         440
Set aside all sophisms, and speak now true and plain.

PARROT

So many moral matters, and so little used;<148>
So much new making,<149>and so mad time spent;
So much translation into English confused;
So much noble preaching, and so little amendment;
So much consultation, almost to none intent;
So much provision, and so little wit at need;-
Since Deucalion's flood there can no clerks rede.

So little discretion, and so much reasoning;
So much hardy dardy, and so little manliness;                 450
So prodigal expense, and so shameful reckoning;
So gorgeous garments, and so much wretchedness;
So much portly pride, with purses penniless;
So much spent before, and so much unpaid behind;-
Since Deucalion's flood there can no clerks find.

So much forecasting, and so far an after deal;
So much politic prating, and so little standeth in stead;
So little secretness, and so much great counsel;
So many bold barons, their hearts as dull as lead;
So many noble bodies under a daw's head;                      460
So royal a king as reigneth upon us all;- 
Since Deucalion's flood was never seen nor shall.

So many complaints, and so small redress;
So much calling on, and so small taking heed;
So much loss of merchandise, and so remediless;
So little care for the common weal, and so much need;
So much doubtful danger,<150> and so little dread;
So much pride of prelates, so cruel and so keen;-
Since Deucalion's flood, I trow, was never seen.

So many thieves hanged, and thieves never the less;           470
So much 'prisonment for matters not worth an haw;<151>
So much papers wearing for right a small excess;<152>
So much pillory-pageants under colour of good law;
So much turning on the cuck-stool for every gee-gaw;
So much mockish making of statutes of array;-
Since Deucalion's flood was never, I dare say.

So brainless calves' heads, so many sheeps' tails;
So bold a bragging butcher, and flesh sold so dear;
So many plucked partridges, and so fat quails;
So mangy a mastiff cur, the great greyhound's peer;<153>      480
So big a bulk of brow-antlers cabbaged that year;<154>
So many swans dead, and so small revel;-
Since Deucalion's flood, I trow, no man can tell.

So many truces taken, and so little perfect truth;
So much belly-joy, and so wasteful banqueting;
So pinching and sparing, and so little profit groweth;
So many huge houses building, and so small householding;
Such statutes upon diets, such pilling and polling;<155>
So is all thing wrought wilfully without reason and skill;-   490
Since Deucalion's flood, the world was never so ill.

So many vagabonds, so many beggars bold;
So much decay of monasteries and of religious places;
So hot hatred against the Church, and charity so cold;
So much of 'my Lord's Grace,' and in him no graces;
So many hollow hearts, and so double faces;
So much sanctuary-breaking,<156> and privilege barred;-
Since Deucalion's flood was never seen nor lyerd.

So much ragged right of a ram's horn;
So rigorous ruling<157> in a prelate specially;
So bold and so bragging, and was so basely born;              500
So lordly in his looks and so disdainously;
So fat a maggot, bred of a flesh-fly;
Was never such a filthy Gorgon, nor such an epicure,
Since Deucalion's flood, I make thee fast and sure.

So much privy watching in cold winters' nights;
So much searching of losels, and is himself so lewd;
So much conjurations for elfish mid-day sprites;
So many bulls of pardon published and shewed;
So much crossing and blessing, and him all beshrewed;
Such pole-axes and pillars, such mules trapped with gold<158>
                                                              510
Since Deucalion's flood in no chronicle is told.

Dixit, quod Parrot.

Crescet in immensum me vivo Psittacus iste;
Hinc mea dicetur Skeltonidis inclita fama.<159>

Quod Skelton Laureat,
Orator Regius.
34.



NOTES TO SPEAK, PARROT

1. That the extant portions of this very obscure production were
written at intervals, is not to be doubted; and that we do not
possess all that Skelton composed under the title of Speak,
Parrot, is proved by the following passage of the Garland of
Laurel, where, enumerating his various works, he mentions

"the Popinjay, that hath in commendation
Ladies and gentlewomen such as deserved,
And such as be counterfeits they be reserved."
v. 1188.

a description which, as it answers to no part of the existing poem
(or poems), must apply to some portion which has perished, and
which, I apprehend, was of an earlier date. "The Popinjay" is
assuredly only another name for Speak, Parrot;

"Go, little quaire, named the Popinjay."
Speak, Parrot, v. 280.

2. Lectoribus auctor recipit &c.] "By his readers an author
receives an amplification of his short poem. The present book will
grow greatly while I am alive; thence will the golden reputation
of Skelton be proclaimed." (SP) For "recipit" MS has "recepit."
The next two lines are given very inaccurately here in MS., but
are repeated (with a slight variation) more correctly at the end
of the poem. The Latin portions of the MS. are generally of
ludictrous incorrectness, the transcriber evidently not having
understood that language.

3. Parrot, a bird of paradise] So Lydgate (in a poem, entitled in
the Catalogue, Advices for people to keep a guard over their
tongues);

"Popinjays from paradise comen all green."
MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 133.

"Then spake the popinjay of paradise."
Parliament of Birds, sig. A ii. n. d.

4. Side note here: Lucanus. Tigris et Euphrates uno se fonte
resolvunt. "Lucan. The Tigris and the Euphrates flow from one
source". See Pharsalia iii. 256. But the line here quoted is from
Boethii Consol Phil. lib v. met. 1.

5. Then Parrot must have an almond] In Jonson's Magnetic Lady, act
v. se. 5, we find,-

"Poll is a fine bird! O fine lady Poll!
Almond for Parrot, Parrot's a brave bird;"

and Gifford, citing the last line (he ought rather to have cited
v. 50), observes that Jonson was indebted to Skelton for "most of
this jargon." Works, vi. 109.

6. Side note here: Topographia, quam habet haec avicula in
deliciis. "A description of the delightful home of this little
bird."

7.Side note here: Delectatur in factura sua, tamen res est forma
fugax. "He is delighted with his own work, despite his show of
modesty."

8. My feathers fresh as is the emerald green] So Ovid in his
charming verses on Corinna's parrot;

"Tu poteras virides pennis hebetare smaragdos."
(You couild outshine emeralds with your green feathers)
Am. lib. ii. vi. 21.

9. My proper Parrot, my little pretty fool]-proper, i.e. pretty,
handsome (elsewhere Skelton uses "proper "and "pretty "as
synonyms: see Philip Sparrow, v. 127.

"I pray thee what hath ere the Parrot got,
And yet they say he talks in great men's bowers?
. . . . . . . . . .
A good fool call'd with pain perhaps may be."
Sidney's Arcadia, lib. ii. p. 229. ed. 1613.

10. Side note here: Psittacus a vobis aliorum nomina disco: Hoc
per me didici dicere, Caesar, ave. "I, a parrot, am taught by you
the names of others; I have learned of myself to say, 'Hail!
Caesar!'" (tr. Bohn) Martial xiv. 73.

11. Quis expedivit psittaco suum chaire?] "Who taught Parrot to
say Hallo?" (chaire = Greek ?a??e) (PH).

12. Douce French of Paris] Douce, i.e. sweet, soft. Chaucer's
Prioress spoke French

"After the school of Stratford atte bowe,
For French of Paris was to her unknow."
Prol. to Cant. Tales, v. 125. ed. Tyr.

Side note here: Docibilem se pandit in omni idiomate.
Polichronitudino Baliseos. "He expresses himself sweetly in every
language. Kings Chronicle."

13. after my property] i.e. in the way that I can best do;
Property in the sense of a special characteristic or talent.

14. Parlez bien, Parrot, ou parlez rien!] "Say well, Parrot, or
say nothing!"

15. Side note here: Katerina universalis vitii ruina, Graecum est.
Fidasso de cosso .i. habeto fidem in temet ipso. Auctoritate[m]
inconsultam taxat hic. Lege Flaccum, et observa plantatum
diabolum. This is very obscure. It seems to mean "Katherine
(brings about) the destruction of every kind of vice, it is Greek.
To trust in oneself, that is, have faith in your own convictions.
This examines an unconsulted authority. Read Flaccus, and see the
devil planted." Katerina universalis vitii ruina, Graecum est is
an allusion to the Greek word from which Katherine is derived,
i.e. ?a?a???? (katharizo) or ?a?a??? (catharos), meaning "clean"
or "pure".

16. Parrot, saves habler Castiliano] "Parrot, can you speak
Castilian?" - this is a question which Spanish boys at the present
day frequently address to that bird.

Saves-So MS. Eds. "saiues:"-"habler" ought to be "hablar;" but
throughout this work I have not altered the spelling of quotations
in modern languages, because Skelton probably wrote them
inaccurately.

17. With fidasso de cosso in Turkey and in Thrace]-fidasso de
cosso [Old editions, sidasso de cosso, and sidasso de costo] is
perhaps lingua franca,-some corruption of the Italian fidarsi di
se stesso ("To trust in oneself" PH)

18. Vis consilii expers . . Mole ruit sua] "Strength without
wisdom falls by its own weight."(PH). From Horace, Carm. iii. iv.
65.

19. Soventez foys, Parrot, en souvenante] "Many times, Parrot,
within memory." (PH)

20. Side note here: Saepenumero haec pensitans psittacus ego
pronuntio. Aphorismo, quia paranomasia certe incomprehensibilis.
("I very often declare this to be the parrot thinking. This I say
as an aphorism because a pun would certainly be
incomprehensible.") Pronuntio (I declare) is probably not the
right reading. The MS. seems to have either "pô sio" or "pô fio".

21. An almond now for Parrot] I know not if these words occur in
any writer anterior to the time of Skelton; but they afterwards
became a sort of proverbial expression. See note 5 above.

22. Salve festa dies, toto] "On holiday it is best to go the whole
hog. (PH)" Skelton has two copies of verses, which begin "Salve,
festa dies, toto," &c.

23. Moderata juvant] "Moderation delights us (PH)". Side note
here: Aptius hic loquitur animus quam lingua. Notum adagium et
exasperans. "The imagination speaks more fittingly of this than
the tongue. A well-known and exasperating proverb."

24. Myden agan] i.e. Greek ??de? a?a? "Not too much" .

25. Haec res acu tangitur, Parrot, par ma foy] "This thing is
sharply touched, parrot, by my faith!"

26. Ticez-vous, Parrot, tenez vous coye!] Shut up, Parrot; be
quiet!

27. Que pensez-vous] "What do you think?"

28. Vitulus] A calf.

29. cum sensu maturato] "With a mature perception."

30. Ne tropo sanno, ne tropo mato.] "Not too sane, not too mad."

31. Jobab was brought up in the land of Hus] "Verisimile est Jobum
eumdem esse cum Jobabo, qui quartus est ab Esau ... Duces in ista
opinione sequimur omnes fere antiques Patres quos persuasit, ut
ita sentirent, additamentum in exemplaribus Gracis, Arabicis et in
antiqua Vulgata Latina appositum: 'Job vero habitabat in terra
Hus, inter terminos Edom et Arabia, et antea vocabatur Jobab,'"
&c. "Truly Job is the same as Jobab, who was the fourth from Esau
. . . In this opinion we follow the lead of every old Patristic
writer, in addition to Greek and Arabic exemplars, and also in the
old Latin Vulgate: 'Job truly lived in the land of Hus, between
the border of Edom and Arabia, and was formerly called Jobab'"
Concord antic; Bibl. Sacr. Vulg. Ed. by Dutripon, in v. Job. ii.

32. Ebrius] Drunk

33. Howst thee, lyver god van hemrik, ich seg] Howst thee is (I
suppose) Hist thee: what follows is German,-lieber Gott von
Himmelreich, ich sage-Dear God of heaven's kingdom, I say,-spoken
by way of oath.

34. In Popering grew pears] From Popering, a parish in the Marches
of Calais (see Tyrwhitt's note on Chaucer's Cant. Tales, v.
13650), the poprin, poperin, or popperin pear, frequently
mentioned in our early dramas, was introduced into this country.

35. Over in a whinny Meg] The initial words of a ballad or song.
Laneham (or Langham) in his strange Letter concerning the
entertainment to Queen Elizabeth at Kenilworth Castle in 1575,
mentions it as extant in the collection of Captain Cox, who
figured in the shows on that occasion: "What should I rehearse
here what a bunch of Ballets and songs all ancient: As Broom broom
on hill, So woe is me begone, Trolly lo, Over a whinny Meg," &c.
See Collier's Bridgewater-House Catalogue, p. 164.

36. Hop Lobyn of Lowdeon] See note 7 to Against the Scots.

37. The gibbet of Baldock] Is mentioned again in our author's Why
come ye not to Court, v. 953. "And in Caldee the chief City is
Baldock." Voyage and Travel of Sir J. Mandeville, p. 51. ed. 1725.

38. Ich dien] "I serve."

39. Beme] i.e. Bohemia, now the Czech Republic.

40. byrsa] An allusion to Virgil;

"Mercatique solum, facti de nomine Byrsam,
Taurino quantum possent circumdare tergo."
"And bought ground, called thence Byrsa,
As much as a bull's hide would encircle" (J.W.Mackail)
Aen. i. 367.

Perhaps too Skelton recollected a passage in Lydgate's Fall of
Princes, B. ii. leaf xlviii. ed. Wayland.

41. Colostrum] i.e. the beestings,-the first milk after the birth
given by a cow (or other milch animal). This form of the word
occurs in the title of an epigram by Martial, lib. xiii. 38, and
in Servius's commentary on Virgil, Ecl. ii. 22.

42. Moryshe mine own shelf! the costermonger sayeth] From the next
line it would seem that "Moryshe "is meant for the Irish
correction of some English word; but of what word I know not.

43. Fate, fate, fate, ye Irish waterlag] Waterlag is a water
carrier. Mr. Crofton Croker obligingly observes to me that he has
no doubt of "fate" being intended for the Irish pronunciation of
the word water.-"There is risen a fray among the water laggers.
Coorta est rixa inter amphorarios." Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. q vi.
ed. 1530.

44. Let Sir Wrig-wrag wrestle with Sir Delarag] See note 53 to
Poems against Garnesche.

45. Pawbe une arver] Welsh-either Paub un arver, Every one his
manner, or Paub yn ei arver, Every one in his manner.

46. unde depromo
Dilemmata docta in paedagogio
Sacro vatem] "Whence I produce learned arguments in the poet's
sacred school." (PH)

47. solace, pleasure, disport, and play] One of Skelton's
pleonasms.

48. Caesar, ave] "Hail, Caesar." "Ut plurimum docebantur hae aves
salutationis verba . . . interdum etiam plurium vocum versus aut
sententias docebantur: ut corvi, qui admirationi fuerunt Augusto
ex Actiaca victoria revertenti, quorum alter institutus fuerat
dicere, Ave Caesar, &c." "Generally these birds were taught words
of salutation . . . sometimes they were even taught lines of
poetry or sentences: so that to show the admiration in which
Augustus was held after his return from Actium, a crow was taught
to say Hail, Caesar &c." Casaubonus ad Persii Prol. v. 8.

49. Esebon] The chief city of the Ammonites. Judith. v. 15.

50. of Judicum read the book] i.e. read the Book of Judges.

"In Iudicum the story ye may read."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. i. leaf xiv. ed. Wayland.

51. O Esebon, Esebon! to thee is come again
Seon, the regent Amorraeorum,
And Og, that fat hog of Bashan, doth retain
The crafty coistronus Cananaeorum] coistronus Cananaeorum -i.e.
Caananite villain.-coistronus is a Latinised form of custron, see
note 1 to Upon a Comely Custron. Though in an earlier part of
Speak, Parrot, we find "Christ save King Henry the viii, our royal
king," &c. v. 36, yet it would almost seem that he is alluded to
here under the name of Seon. Og must mean Wolsey. This portion of
the poem is not found in MS. Harl, and there can be no doubt that
Speak, Parrot is made up of pieces composed at various times.
After Skelton's anger had been kindled against Wolsey, perhaps the
monarch came in for a share of his indignation.

52. asylum, whilom refugium miserorum, &c.] "Sanctuary, formerly
the refuge of the unfortunate". So afterwards in this piece, v.
496, among the evils which Skelton attributes to Wolsey, mention
is made of "much sanctuary breaking;" and in Why come ye not to
Court? he says of the Cardinal that "all privileged places He
breaks and defaces," &c. v. 1086.

53. Non fanum, sed profanum] "Not sacred, but profane"

54. trim-tram] See note 11 to The Tunning of Elynour Rumming.

55. Scarpary] In Tuscany. So afterwards, "Over Scarpary," v. 408;
and in The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy, "Mont Scarpry." Dunbar's
Poems, ii. 82. ed. Laing.

56. Quod magnus est dominus Judas Iscariot] "How mighty is lord
Judas Iscariot." (PH)

57. Haly] See note 50 to Philip Sparrow.

58. the Volvelle . . . tirikkis. . ] See note 25 to The Garland of
Laurel.

59. Monon calon agaton
Quod Parrato
In Graeco.] "The only beauty is goodness, said the Parrot in
Greek." Monon calon agaton-????? ?a??? a?a???.

60. aurea lingua Graeca] "The Golden Greek Language"

61. As lingua Latina, in school matter occupied] lingua Latina
"the Latin langauge"; in school matter occupied i.e. used in
school studies.

62. a syllogism in phrisesomorum] "Sic [indirecte] in prima figura
concludunt quinque illi modi, qui ab interpretibus fere omnibus
(excepto Zabarella) pro legitimis agnoscuntur, quique hoc versu
comprehendi solent, Celantes, Baralip, Dabilis, Fapesmo,
Frisesom." ("Thus the first figure includes these five moods,
which are acknowledged as legitimate by all authorities (except
Zabarella) which are usually understood by the names Celantes,
Baralip, Dabilis, Fapesmo, Frisesom" Crakanthorp's Logicae Libri
Quinque, 1622. p. 275.

63. Formaliter et Graece, cum medio termino. "Formally in the
Greek fashion, with a middle term"

64. the wash-bowl Argolicorum] i.e the springs of the Erasinos,
where sacrifices were made to the god Pan.

65. They] Qy. "ye" here-or "they" in the three preceding lines?

66. secundum quid ad simpliciter] "[what is true] in a certain
respect and [what is true] absolutely", a type of informal fallacy
that occurs when the arguer fails to recognize the difference
between rules of thumb (soft generalizations, heuristics that hold
true as a general rule but leave room for exceptions) and
categorical propositions, rules that hold true universally"
(Wikipedia)

67. pro Areopagita] "For the Areopagus", the site of the highest
courts in ancient Athens. The sense of these two lines is that
some people make logical fallacies in their arguments but still
think themselves great orators.

68. make distinctions multiplicita] i.e. argue at length over
trivial distinctions.

69. sophia] "Wisdom."

70. Jack Raker] See note 43 to Poems against Garnesche.

71. Graece fari] "Speaking Greek"

72. Latinum fari] "Speaking Latin"

73. And syllogisari was drowned at Stourbridge Fair] syllogisari
"to argue logically". Stourbridge Fair was kept annually in the
neighbourhood of Cambridge, and so named from the rivulet Stour
and bridge.

74. Trivials and quatrivials] The trivials were the first three
sciences taught in the schools, viz. Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic;
the quatrivials were the higher set, viz, Astrology (or
Astronomy), Geometry, Arithmetic, and Music. See Du Cange's Gloss.
in vv. Trivium, Quadrivium; and Hallam's Introd. to the Lit. of
Europe, i. 4.

75. Albertus de modo significandi] "Albertus," says Warton, after
citing this stanza, "is the author of the Margarita Poetica, a
collection of Flores from the classics and other writers, printed
at Nurenberg, 1472, fol." Hist. of E. P., ii. 347 (note), ed. 4to.
The work mentioned here by Skelton is stated to have been first
printed in 1480. The title of an edition by Wynkyn de Worde, dated
1515, is as follows; Modi significandi Alberti sine quibus
grammaticae notitia haberi nullo pacto potest ("The rules laid
down by Albertus without which no knowledge of grammar can be
had"): there is said to be another edition n. d. by the same
printer: see Typ. Ant., ii. 208. ed. Dibdin.

76. Donatus] i.e. the work attributed to Aelius Donatus, the Roman
grammarian: see the Bibliog. Dictionary of Dr. Clarke (iii. 144),
who observes; "It has been printed with several titles, such as
Donatus; Donatus Minor; Donatus pro puerulis, Donati Ars, &c., but
the work is the same, viz. Elements of the Latin Language for the
Use of Children." See too Warton's Hist. of E. P., i. 281 (note),
ed. 4to.

77. Inter didascolos] "Interdidascolos is the name of an old
grammar." Warton's Hist. of E. P., ii. 347 (note), ed. 4to. Warton
may be right; but I have never met with any grammar that bears
such a title.

78. Alexander] i.e. Alexander de Villa Dei, "author of the
Doctrinale Puerorum, which for some centuries continued to be the
most favourite manual of grammar used in schools, and was first
printed at Venice in the year 1473 [at Treviso, in 1472; see Typ.
Ant., ii. 116. ed. Dibdin]. It is compiled from Priscian, and in
Leonine verse. See Henr. Gandav. Scriptor. Eccles. cap. lix. This
admired system has been loaded with glosses and lucubrations; but,
on the authority of an ecclesiastical synod, it was superseded by
the Commentarii Grammatici of Despauterius, in 1512. It was
printed in England as early as the year 1503 by W. de Worde. [The
existence of this ed. has been questioned. The work was printed by
Pynson in 1505, 1513, 1516: see Typ. Ant., ii. 116, 426, 427, ed.
Dibdin, and Lowndes's Bibliog Man., i. 27]. Barklay, in the Ship
of Fools, mentions Alexander's book, which he calls 'The old
Doctrinal with his diffuse and unperfect brevity.' fol. 53. b [ed.
1570]" Warton's Hist. of E. P., ii. 347 (note), ed. 4to.

79. Menander's pool] See note 42 to Philip Sparrow.

80. Da Cansales] "He perhaps means Concilia, or the canon law."
Warton's Hist. of E. P., ii. 347 (note), ed. 4to.

81. Da Racionales] "He seems to intend Logic." Id. ibid.

82. Petty Caton] Cato Parvus (a sort of supplement to Cato Magnus,
i.e. Dionysii Catonis Disticha de Moribus) was written by Daniel
Churche, or Ecclesiensis, a domestic in the court of Henry the
Second; see Warton's Hist. of E. P., ii. 170, and Dibdin's ed. of
Typ. Ant., i. 120.

83. Aveto in Graeco] "Good morning in Greek"

84. whole sentence] i.e. whole meaning.

85. cum gariopholo] "With a clove". So, I believe, Skelton wrote,
though the classical form of the word is garyophyllo.

86. pleris cum musco] "An ointment with musk." Ed. of Kynge and
Marche, "pleris com musco." Eds. of Day and Marshe "pleris
commusco." Instead of "pleris", the Rev. J. Mitford proposes
"flarnis" (species placentae ("A kind of cake.")).

87. quasi diaphanum] "as though transparent" (PH)

88. Vel quasi speculum, in aenigmate] "Like a mirror, in a riddle"
(PH)

89. Elencticum, or else enthymematicum] "an elenchus or else an
enthymeme (PH)"-these are terms in logic; elenchus is a method of
eliciting truth by question and answer, as used by Socrates;
enthymeme is a rehtorical argument. 

90. fresh humanity] i.e. elegant literature; see notes 9 and 221
to The Garland of Laurel

91. confuse tantum] "so much confusion" (PH)

92. Confuse distributive] "Methodical confusion" (PH)

93. Psittacus, ecce, cano; nec sunt mea carmina Phoebo
Digna scio; tamen est plena camena deo. "Behold Parrot, I sing; I
know my songs are not worthy of Phoebus; yet the inspiration comes
from the god" (PH).

94. Secundum Skeltonida famigeratum,
In Piereorum catalogo numeratum.] "Here continues the work of the
famous Skelton, numbered in the catalogue of the Muses"

95. Itaque consolamini invicem in verbis istis &c.] "Wherefore
comfort one another with these words." From the Vulgate, 1 Thess.
iv. 17.

96. Candidi lectores, callide callete; vestrum fovete Psittacum,
&c.] "Fair readers, shrewdly cherish your Parrot" (PH)

97. Side note here: Hic occurrat memoriae Pamphilus de amore
Galatheae. "Here is a reference to the love of Pamphilus and
Galathea."

98. when Pamphylus lost his make]-make, i.e. mate. As the heading
"Galathea" precedes this couplet, there is an allusion to a once
popular poem concerning the loves of Pamphilus and Galathea,-
Pamphili Mauriliani Pamphilus, sive De Arte Amandi Elegiae. It is
of considerable length, and though written in barbarous Latin, was
by some attributed to Ovid. It may be found in a little volume
edited by Goldastus, Ovidii Nasonis Pelignensis Erotica et
Amatoria Opuscula, &c. 1610. See too the lines cited in note 137
to The Garland of Laurel.

99. Side note here: In ista cantilena ore stilla plena abjectis
frangibulis et aperit. (Seems to mean "In this old song the mouth
full of drops opens by a wretched breaker"-which makes no sense.)
Grossly corrupted. The Rev. J. Mitford proposes "ore stillanti."
("dribbling mouth") MS has "eperit."

100. Side note here: Quid quaeritis tot capita, tot census? "What
do you look for, so many heads, so many counted?"

101. Side note here: Maro: Malo me Galatea petit, lasciva puella,
et fugit ad salices, &c. "Virgil: Galatea, the wanton girl, threw
an apple at me and fled into the willows." Eclogues, iii. 64.

102. Martialis cecinit carmen, fit mihi scutum
Est mihi lasciva pagina, vita proba.] "Martial sang a song, which
makes a shield for me. It is 'My poems are naughty, but my life is
pure'"-Martial, Ep. i. 5.

103. Vita et anima,
Zoe kai psyche.] "Life and soul" in Latin and Greek respectively.
Side note here: Non omnes capiunt verbum istud, sed quibus datum
est desuper. "Not everyone understands these words, but those to
whom it is given from above."

104. Concumbunt Graece. Non est hic sermo pudicus.] "They will lie
together in Greek. This is not obscene talk." (PH). Side note
here: Aquinates. ("The man from Aquinum") This has crept into the
text in eds. and is not clearly distinguished from the text in MS.
But it is certainly a marginal note-meaning Juvenal, from whom
"Concumbunt Graece, &c." is quoted. Sat. vi. 291.

105. Ergo
Attica dictamina
Sunt plumbi lamina,
Vel spuria vitulamina:
Avertat haec Urania!] "Therefore the Attic sayings are sheets of
lead (i.e. the Greek language is a shield) or, if you prefer,
bastard slips: May Urania prevent this!" Spuria vitulamina is from
the Vulgate, Spuria vitulamina non dabunt radices altas. "bastard
slips shall not take deep root." Wisdom iv. 3
Side note here. "Sua consequentia magni aestimatur momenti Attica
sane eloquentia." "His Attic eloquence, which follows, is
certainly greatly esteemed."

106. Cum caeteris paribus] "With the other like things" (PH)

107. From this Lenvoy primere inclusive to the end of Speak,
Parrot, with the exception of a few stanzas, the satire is
directed wholly against Wolsey. The very obscure allusions to the
Cardinal's being employed in some negotiation abroad are to be
referred probably to his mission in 1521. That Speak, Parrot 
consists of pieces written at various periods has been already
noticed: and "Pope Julius," v. 425, means, I apprehend, (not
Julius ii., for he died in 1513, but) Clement vii., Julius de
Medici, who was elected Pope in 1523. With respect to the dates
which occur after the present Lenuoy,-"Penultimo die Octobris,
33°," "in diebus Novembris, 34," &c., if "33" and "34 "stand for
1533 and 1534 (when both Skelton and the Cardinal were dead), they
must have been added by the transcriber; and yet in the volume
from which these portions of Speak, Parrot are now printed (MS.
Harl. 2252) we find, only a few pages before, the name "John Colyn
mercer of London," with the date "1517." At the end of Why come ye
not to Court we find (what is equally puzzling) "xxxiiii."

108. Jerubbesheth] i.e. Wolsey

109. Le tonsan de Jason] "Jason's (golden) fleece."

110. Lyacon] Occurs again in v. 393: is it Lycaon?

111. But lewdly are they lettered that your learning lacks] i.e.
badly, meanly, are they lettered that find fault with your
learning.

112. curs of kind] i.e. curs by nature.

113. Again all remords] i.e. Against all blamings, censures,
carpings: see note 77 to Poems against Garnesche: but as in v.
368, where MS. has "remordes," the sense absolutely requires
"remorders," there is perhaps the same error here.

114. Monostichon] A single verse of poetry.

115. Ipse sagax aequi ceu verax nuntius ito.
Morda puros mal desires. Portugues.
Penultimo die Octobris, 33°] Morda puros mal desires-This strange
gibberish (which occurs twice afterwards) seems to mean,-"To bite
the pure, is an evil desire". The whole, therefore, can be
translated as-"Himself fair-minded, let him go like a truthful
messenger. To bite the pure is an evil desire. Portuguese. The
30th of October, 33"

116. Our sullen seigneur Sadoc] in applying the name Sadoc to
Wolsey, Skelton alludes to the high-priest of Scripture (2 Samuel
viii. 17) not to the knight of the Round Table.

117. nostre dame de Crome] So in A Merry Play between Johan the
Husband, Tyb his Wife, and Sir Jehan the Priest, 1533, attributed
to Heywood;

"But, by gog's blood, were she come home
Unto this my house, by our lady of Crome,
I wold beat her ere that I drynke."
p. 1. reprint.

118. to exploit the man out of the moon] i.e. to achieve the feat
of driving the man out of the moon.

119. Psittace, perge volans, fatuorum tela retundas.
Morda puros mal desires. Portugues.
In diebus Novembris,
34.] "Parrot, go on flying, turn back the shafts of fatuity.(PH)
To bite the pure is an evil desire. Portuguese. In the November
days, 34"

120. DEREYN] "Last"

121. Sydrake] So Wolsey is termed here in allusion to a romance
(characterised by Warton as "rather a romance of Arabian
philosophy than of chivalry," Hist. of E. P., i. 143. ed. 4to),
which was translated from the French by Hugh of Caumpeden, and
printed in 1510, under the title of The History of King Boccus and
Sydracke, &c.

122. a cherry-stone pit] An allusion to a game played with cherry-
stones;

"I can play at the cherry pit,
And I can whistle you a fit,
Sires, in a willow rind.
The World and the Child, 1522. sig. A iii.

123. Non sine postica sanna] "Not without a grimace behind his
back" (PH). Persius Satires i. 65.

124. I, properans Parrote, malas sic corripe linguas.
Morda puros mal desires. Portugues.
15 Kalendis Decembris,
34.] "Go in haste, Parrot, and thus reprove the evil tongues. To
bite the pure is an evil desire. Portuguese. 15th December, 34."
Parrote must be here considered as a Latin word, and a trisyllable
(long-long-short)

125. DISTICHON MISERABILE] "a wretched couplet" (PH).

126. Altior, heu, cedro, crudelior, heu, leopardo!
Heu, vitulus bubali fit dominus Priami!] "Higher, alas, than the
cedar, more cruel, alas, than the leopard! Alas, the calf of the
wild ox become the lord of Priam!" (PH)

127. Tetrastichon-Unde species Priami est digna imperio. "A
quatrain-Whence the race of Priam is worthy to rule"

128. Non annis licet et Priamus sed honore voceris:
Dum foveas vitulum, rex, regeris, Britonum;
Rex, regeris, non ipse regis: rex inclyte, calle;
Subde tibi vitulum, ne fatuet nimium.] "It is not because of your
age but because of your rank that you are called Priam. While you
cherish the calf, king of Britain, you are ruled: King, you are
ruled, you do not yourself rule: illustrious king, be wise, subdue
the calf, lest he become too foolish."

129. Kalendis Decembris "1st December"

130. DISTICHON] "Couplet"

131. I, volitans, Parrote, tuam moderare Minervam:
Vix tua percipient, qui tua teque legent.] "Go, flying Parrot,
moderate your wit: scarce will they understand you who read you
and your writings." (PH). For "volitans" MS has utilans
("useful"): not, I think, a mistake for "rutilans:" ("reddening")
compare above, "Psittace, perge, volans," and "I, properans,
Parrot."

132. Psittacus hi notus seu Persius est puto notus,
Nec reor est nec erit licet est erit.] Thus corrected by a
reviewer in Gent. Mag.

Psittacus hic notus seu Persius est puto notus,
Nec reor est, nec erit, nec licet est, nec erit
"This Parrot, alas, is known, as Persius is, I think, known. Nor, I
believe, is he (i.e. the Parrot) nor will he be everywhere known,
though he (i.e. Persius) is and will be everywhere known." (SP)

133. Maledite soit bouche malheureuse!] "Cursed be the evil
mouth!"

134. O unice dilecte, votorum meorum 
Omnis lapis, lapis pretiosus operimentum tuum!] "O only loved one,
the whole jewel of my prayers, every precious stone is thy
covering (PH)" From the Vulgate, "Omnis lapis pretiosus
operimentum tuum." "every precious stone is thy covering" Ezech.
xxviii. 13.

135. Sicut Aaron populumque, sic bubali vitulus, sic bubali
vitulus, sic bubali vitulus. "As Aaron and the people, so the calf
of the wild ox, so the calf of the wild ox, so the calf of the
wild ox" (PH)

136. Le Popinjay s'en va complaindre:] "The parrot begins to
lament."

137. pluck the crow] i.e. enter into a quarrel.

138. C'est chose malheureuse,
Que mall bouche.] "It is an unfortunate thing, an evil mouth."

139. Jupiter ut nitido deus est veneratus Olympo;
Hic coliturque deus.
Sunt data thura Jovi, rutilo solio residenti;
Cum Jove thura capit.
Jupiter astrorum rector dominusque polorum,
Anglica sceptra regit.] "As Jove is venerated in shining Olympus,
he is worshipped here as a god. Incense is given to Jove, sitting
on his red-gold throne; with Jove he takes the incense. Jove,
ruler of the stars and lord of the poles, rules the English
kingdom." (PH)

140. For pass a pace apace is gone to catch a moll] Qy. is there
an allusion here to Secretary Pace?

141. Scarpary mala vi] Scarpary-in Tuscany. "Mala vi"-"By evil
force".

142. To lour] Qy. "Lout?"

143. to play couch quail] i.e. to cower, crouch down, to hide as a
quail does in long grass. So in Thersytes, n. d.;

"How I have made the knaves for to play couch quail."
p. 42. Roxb. ed.

"And thou shalt make him couch as doth a quail."
The Clerk's Tale, v. 9082. ed. Tyr.

144. He faceth out at a flush] flush, i.e. a hand of cards all of
a sort. Compare The Bowge of Court, v. 315.

"And so outface him with a card of ten."

145. Skirgalliard, proud palliard, vauntparler, ye prate!]
Skirgalliard-see note15 to Against the Scots; proud palliard-so,
afterwards, the Duke of Albany is termed by Skelton in his tirade
against that nobleman, v. 168; Paillard-A lecher, wencher,
whoremonger, whorehunter; also, a knave, rascal, varlet,
scoundrel, filthy fellow." Cotgrave's Dict.; vauntparler-"Avant-
parleur. A forespeaker; or one that is too forward to speak."
Cotgrave's Dict.; "Which be the vauntparlers and heads of their
faction." Letter of Bedyll to Cromwell,-State Papers (1830), i.
424.

146. ex qua vi,
Patet per versus, quod ex vi bolte harvi] "from which power, it is
plain from my verse, he said that from strength . . . " (SP)-the
meaning of bolte harvi is unknown.

147. Great raisins with reasons be now reprobitant,
For raisins are no reasons, but reasons currant.] Perhaps this is
the earliest instance of a quibble between raisins and reasons.
The same pun is used by Shakespeare in Much Ado about Nothing, act
v. sc. 1, and (though Steevens thinks not) in Troilus and
Cressida, act ii. sc. 2: compare also Dekker; "Raisons will be
much asked for especially in an action of injury." The Owl's
Almanack, 1618. p. 36.

148. So many moral matters, &c.] There is a considerable
resemblance between this concluding portion of Speak, Parrot, and
a piece attributed to Dunbar, entitled A General Satire; see his
Poems, ii. 24. ed. Laing

149. So much new making] i.e. so much new composing of poetry etc.

150. doubtful danger] i.e. danger that ought to cause dread

151. not worth an haw] See note 179 to Magnificence.

152. So much papers wearing for right a small excess]-excess, i.e
offence. "And for a truth he [the Cardinal] so punished perjury
with open punishment & open papers wearing, that in his time it
was less used." Hall's Chron. (Hen. viii) fol. lix. ed. 1548.
Criminals were obliged to wear a paper detailing their crimes.

153. So bold a bragging butcher, . .
. . . . 
So mangy a mastiff cur, the great greyhound's peer;] Again, in his
Why come ye not to Court, Skelton alludes to the report that
Wolsey was the son of a butcher, vv. 295 and 491. Compare too
Roy's satire against Wolsey, Read Me, and be not wroth, &c.;

"The mastiff cur, bred in Ipswich town.
 . . . .
Wat. He commeth then of some noble stock?
Jeff. His father could snatch a bullock,
A butcher by his occupation."
Harl. Miscell. ix. 3. 31. ed. Park.

and a poem Of the Cardinal Wolsey;

"To see a churl a Butcher's cur,
To reign & rule in such honour," &c.
MS. Harl. 2252. fol. 156.

Cavendish says that Wolsey "was an honest poor man's son;" and the
will of his father (printed by Fiddes) shows that he possessed
some property: but, as Mr. Sharon Turner observes, that Wolsey was
the son of a butcher "was reported and believed while he lived."
Hist. of Reign. of Hen. the Eighth, i. 167. ed. 8 vo.

With the second line of the present passage compare our author's
Why come ye not to Court, where he wishes that "that mastiff"
Wolsey, may

. . . "never confound
The gentle greyhound."
v. 775.

By the greyhound seems to be meant Henry viii., in allusion to the
royal arms.

154. So big a bulk of brow-antlers cabbaged that year] "Cabusser.
To cabbage; to grow to a head," &c.-"The Cabbage of the Deer's
head. Meule de cerf." Cotgrave's Dict. "I cabbage a deer, Je
cabaiche . . . I will cabbage my deer and go with you: Je
cabacheray," &c. Palsgrave, p. 596.

155. such pilling and polling] i.e. such stripping and plundering
(by exactions of various kinds).

156. sanctuary-breaking] see note 52 above.

157. ruling] MS has "reveling" - meant for "ruelyng"

158. Such pole-axes and pillars, such mules trapped with gold] So
Roy in his satire against Wolsey, Read Me, and be not wroth, &c.;

"Wat. Doth he use then on mules to ride?
Jeff. Ye; and that with so shamful pride
That to tell it is not possible:
More like a god celestial
Than any creature mortal,
With worldly pomp incredible.
Before him rideth two priests strong,
And they bear two crosses right long,
Gaping in every man's face:
After them follow two lay-men secular,
And each of them holding a pillar
In their hands, stead of a mace.
Then followeth my lord on his mule,
Trapped with gold under her cule,
In every point most curiously;
On each side a pole-axe is borne,
Which in none other use are worn,
Pretending some hid mystery.
Then hath he servants five or six score,
Some behind and some before,
A marvellous great company:
Of which are lords and gentlemen,
With many grooms and yeomen,
And also knaves among.
Thus daily he proceedeth forth," &c.
Harl. Miscell. ix. 29. ed. Park.

"Then," says Cavendish, "had he two great crosses of silver,
whereof one of them was for his Archbishopric, and the other for
his Legacy (i.e. his office as a legate), borne always before him
whither soever he went or rode, by two of the most tallest and
comeliest priests that he could get within all this realm." Life
of Wolsey, 94. ed. 1827. "And as soon as he was entered into his
chamber of presence, where there was attending his coming to await
upon him to Westminster Hall, as well noble men and other worthy
gentlemen, as noblemen and gentlemen of his own family; thus
passing forth with two great crosses of silver borne before him;
with also two great pillars of silver, and his pursuivant at arms
with a great mace of silver gilt: Then his gentlemen ushers cried,
and said, 'On, my lords and masters, on before; make way for my
Lord's Grace!' Thus passed he down from the chamber through the
hall; and when he came to the hall door, there was attendant for
him his mule, trapped all together [altogether] in crimson velvet,
and gilt stirrups. When he was mounted, with his cross bearers,
and pillar bearers, also upon great horses trapped with [fine]
scarlet: Then marched he forward, with his train and furniture in
manner as I have declared, having about him four footmen, with
gilt pole-axes in their hands; and thus he went until he came to
Westminster Hall door." Id. 106. See also Cavendish's Metrical
Legend of Wolsey, p. 533. ibid. The pillars implied that the
person before whom they were carried was a pillar of the church.
That the Cardinal had a right to the "ensigns and ornaments" which
he used, is shown by Anstis in a letter to Fiddes,-Appendix to
Fiddes's Life of Wolsey.

159. Crescet in immensum me vivo Psittacus iste;
Hinc mea dicetur Skeltonidis inclita fama] "This Parrot will grow
immensely in my lifetime; hence my glorious Skeltonian fame will
be celebrated." (PH)



WHY COME YE NOT TO COURT?

[From the ed. by Kele, n.d.,collated with that by Wyght, n.d.,
with that by Kytson, n.d., and with Marshe's ed. of Skelton's
Works, 1568.]
<1>

HEREAFTER FOLLOWETH A LITTLE BOOK, WHICH HATH TO NAME
WHY COME YE NOT TO COURT?
COMPILED BY MASTER SKELTON, POET LAUREATE

The relucent mirror for all Prelates and Presidents, as well
spiritual as temporal, sadly to look upon, devised in English by
Skelton.

ALL noble men of this take heed,<2>
And believe it as your Creed.

Too hasty of sentence,
Too fierce for none offence,
Too scarce of your expense,
Too large in negligence,
Too slack in recompense,
Too haut in excellence,
Too light [in] intelligence,
And too light in credence;                                     10
Where these keep residence,
Reason is banished thence,
And also Dame Prudence,
With sober Sapience.
All noble men, of this take heed,
And believe it as your Creed.

Then without collusion,
Mark well this conclusion,
Thorough such abusion,
And by such illusion,                                          20
Unto great confusion
A nobleman may fall,
And his honour appal;
And if ye think this shall
Not rub you on the gall
Then the devil take all!

Haec vates ille,
De quo loquuntur mille.<3>                                     30

WHY COME YE NOT TO COURT?

For age is a page
For the court full unmeet,
For age cannot rage,
Nor buss her sweet sweet:

But when age seeth that rage
Doth assuage and refrain,
Then will age have a courage
To come to court again.

But
Helas, sage overage,<4>
So madly decays                                                40
That age for dotage
Is reckoned nowadays:
Thus age (a grande dommage<5>)
Is nothing set by,
And rage in arrearage
Doth run lamentably.

So
That rage must make pillage,
To catch that catch may,
And with such forage
Hunt the boscage,                                              50
That harts will run away;
Both hartes and hinds,
With all good mindes:
Farewell, then, have good-day!

Then, have good-day, adeieu!
For default of rescue,
Some men may haply rue,
And some their heads mew;
The time doth fast ensue,
That bales begin to brew:                                      60
I dread, by sweet Jesu,
This tale will be too true;
In faith, deacon, thou crew,
In faith, deacon, thou crew, &c.<6>

Deacon, thou crew doubtless;
For, truly to express,
There hath been much excess,
With banqueting brainless,
With rioting reckless,
With gambading thriftless,                                     70
With spend and waste witless,
Treating of truce restless,
Prating of peace peaceless.
The countering at Cales<7>
Wrung us on the males:
Chief Counsellor was careless,
Groaning, grouching, graceless;
And, to none intent,
Our talwood all is brent,
Our faggots are all spent,                                     80
We may blow at the coal:<8>
Our mare hath lost her foal,
And Mock hath lost her shoe;<9>
What may she do thereto?
An end of an old song,
Do right and do no wrong,
As right as a ram's horn;<10>
For thrift is threadbare worn,
Our sheep are shrewdly shorn,
And truth is all to-torn;<11>                                  90
Wisdom is laughed to scorn,
Favell<12> is false forsworn,
Javell<13> is nobly born,
Havell<14> and Harvy Hafter,<15>
Jack Travell<16> and Cole Crafter,
We shall hear more hereafter;
With polling and shaving,
With borrowing and craving,
With reaving and raving,
With swearing and staring,                                    100
There vaileth no reasoning,
For will doth rule all thing,
Will, will, will, will, will,
He ruleth alway still.
Good reason and good skill,<17>
They may garlic pill,
Carry sacks to the mill,
Or peascods they may shill,
Or else go roast a stone:<18>
There is no man but one<19>                                   110
That hath the strokes alone;
Be it black or white,
All that he doth is right,
As right as a cammock crooked.
This bill well over-looked,<20>
Clearly perceive we may
There went the hare away,<21>
The hare, the fox, the grey,
The hart, the hind, the buck:<22>
God send us better luck!                                      120
God send us better luck &c.

Twit, Andrew, twit, Scot,
Gae hame, gae scour thy pot;
For we have spent our shot:
We shall have a tot quot<23>
From the Pope of Rome,
To weave all in one loom
A web of linsey-woolsey,<24>
Opus male dulce:<25>
The devil kiss his cule!                                      130
For, whilst he doth rule
All is warse and warse;
The devil kiss his arse!
For whether he bless or curse
It cannot be much worse.
From Bamborough to Bothombar<26>
We have cast up our war,
And made a worthy truce,
With Gup, level suse!<27>
Our money madly lent,
And more madly spent:
From Croydon to Kent,                                         140
Wot ye whither they went?
From Winchelsea to Rye,
And all not worth a fly;<28>
From Wentbridge to Hull
Our army waxeth dull,
With turn all home again,
And never a Scot slain.
Yet the good Earl of Surrey,                                  150
The Frenchmen he doth fray,<29>
And vexeth them day by day
With all the power he may;
The Frenchmen he hath fainted,
And made their hearts attainted:
Of chivalry he is the flower;
Our Lord be his succour!
The Frenchmen he hath so mated,<30>
And their courage abated,
That they are but half men;                                   160
Like foxes in their den,
Like cankered cowards all,
Like urchins in a stone wall,
They keep them in their holds,
Like hen-hearted cuckolds.

But yet they over-shoot us
With crowns and with scutus;<31>
With scutes and crowns of gold.
I dread we are bought and sold;
It is a wondrous wark:                                        170
They shoot all at one mark,
At the Cardinal's hat,
They shoot all at that;
Out of their strong towns
They shoot at him with crowns;<32>
With crowns of gold emblazed
They make him so amazed,
And his eyen so dazed,<33>
That he ne see can<34>
To know God nor man.                                          180
He is set so high
In his hierarchy
Of frantic frenzy
And foolish fantasy,
That in the Chamber of Stars<35>
All matters there he mars;
Clapping his rod on the board,
No man dare speak a word,
For he hath all the saying,
Without any renaying;                                         190
He rolleth in his records,
He sayeth How say ye, my lords?
Is not my reason good?
Good even, good Robin Hood!<36>
Some say Yes! and some
Sit still as they were dumb:
Thus thwarting over them,<37>
He ruleth all the roost
With bragging and with boast;
Borne up on every side                                        200
With pomp and with pride, 
With Trump up, Alleluia!<38>
For dame Philargyria<39>
Hath so his heart in hold
He loveth nothing but gold;
And Asmodeus of hell<40<
Maketh his members swell
With Dalyda<41> to mell,
That wanton damosel.
Adieu, Philosophia,                                           210
Adieu, Theologia!
Welcome, dame Simonia,
With dame Castrimergia,<42>
To drink and for to eat
Sweet hippocras and sweet meat!
To keep his flesh chaste,
In Lent, for a repast<43>
He eateth capons stewed,
Pheasant and partridge mewed,<44>
Hens, chickens, and pigs:                                     220
He foins and he frigs,
Spareth neither maid ne wife:
This is a postle's life!

Helas! my heart is sorry
To tell of vain glory:
But now upon this story
I will no further rime
Till another time,
Till another time &c.

What news, what news?                                         230
Small news that true is,
That be worth ii. Cues;
But at the naked stews,
I understand how that
The Sign of the Cardinal Hat,<45>
That inn is now shut up,
With Gup, whore, gup, now, gup,
Gup, Guilliam Travillian,
With jaist you, I say, Julian!
Will ye bear no coals?<46>                                    240
A meiny of mare-foals,<47>
That occupy their holes,
Full of pocky moles.

What hear ye of Lancashire?
They were not paid their hire;
They are fell as any fire.

What hear ye of Cheshire?
They have laid all in the mire;
They grudged, and said
Their wages were not paid;                                    250
Some said they were afraid
Of the Scottish host,
For all their crake and boast,
Wild fire and thunder;
For all this worldly wonder,
A hundred mile asunder
They were when they were next;
That is a true text.

What hear ye of the Scots?
They make us all sots,                                        260
Popping foolish daws;
They make us to pill straws;
They play their old pranks,
After Huntley banks:<48>
At the stream of Bannockburn
They did us a shrewd turn,
When Edward of Carnarvon
Lost all that his father won.

What hear ye of the Lord Dacres?<49>
He maketh us Jack Rakers;<50>                                 270
He says we are but crakers;
He calleth us England men
Strong-hearted like an hen;
For the Scots and he
Too well they do agree,
With, do thou for me,
And I shall do for thee.
Whiles the red hat<51> doth endure,
He maketh himself cocksure;
The red hat with his lure                                     280
Bringeth all things under cure.

But, as the world now goes,
What hear ye of the Lord Rose?<52>
Nothing to purpose,
Not worth a cockly fose:<53>
Their hearts be in their hose.<54>

The Earl of Northumberland<55>
Dare take nothing on hand:
Our barons be so bold,
Into a mousehole they wold                                    290
Run away and creep;
Like a meiny of sheep,
Dare not look out at door
For dread of the mastiff cur,
For dread of the butcher's dog<56>
Would worry them like an hog.

For an this cur do gnar,
They must stand all afar,
To hold up their hand at the bar.
For all their noble blood                                     300
He plucks them by the hood,
And shakes them by the ear,
And brings them in such fear;
He baiteth them like a bear,
Like an ox or a bull:
Their wits, he sayeth, are dull;
He sayeth they have no brain
Their estate to maintain;
And maketh them to bow their knee
Before his majesty.                                           310
Judges of the king's laws,
He counts them fools and daws;
Serjeants of the coife eke,<57>
He sayeth they are to seek
In pleading of their case
At the Common Pleas,
Or at the King's Bench;
He wringeth them such a wrench,
That all our learned men
Dare not set their pen                                        320
To plead a true trial
Within Westminster Hall;
In the Chancery, where he sits,
But such as he admits
None so hardy to speak;
He sayeth, Thou hoddypeak,
Thy learning is too lewd,
Thy tongue is not well thewed,<58>
To seek before our grace;
And openly in that place                                      330
He rages and he raves,
And calls them cankered knaves;
Thus royally he doth deal
Under the king's broad seal;
And in the Chequer he them checks;
In the Star Chamber he nods and becks,
And beareth him there so stout,
That no man dare rout,
Duke, earl, baron, nor lord,
But to his sentence must accord;                              340
Whether he be knight or squire,
All men must follow his desire.

What say ye of the Scottish king?<59>
That is another thing.
He is but a youngling,
A stalworthy spripling:
There is a whispering and a whipling,
He should be hither brought;
But, an were well sought,
I trow all will be nought,                                    350
Not worth a shuttle-cock,
Nor worth a sour calstock.
There goeth many a lie
Of the Duke of Albany,<60>
That off should go his head,
And brought in quick or dead,
And all Scotland ours
The mountenance of two hours.<61>
But, as some men sayne,
I dread of some false train                                   360
Subtly wrought shall be
Under a feigned treaty;
But, within months three
Men may haply see
The treachery and the pranks
Of the Scottish banks.

What hear ye of Burgonions,
And the Spaniards onions?
They have slain our Englishmen,
Above threescore and ten:                                     370
For all your amity,
No better they agree.

God save my Lord Admiral!
What hear ye of Mutrell?<62>
Therewith I dare not mell.

Yet what hear ye tell
Of our Grand Council?
I could say somewhat,
But speak ye no more of that,
For dread the Red Hat                                         380
Take pepper in the nose;<63>
For then thine head off goes,
Off by the hard arse.<64>
But there is some travarse
Between some and some,
That makes our sire to glum;<65>
It is somewhat wrong,
That his beard is so long;
He mourneth in black clothing.
I pray God save the king!                                     390
Wherever he go or ride,<66>
I pray God be his guide!
Thus will I conclude my style,
And fall to rest a while,
And so to rest a while, &c.

Once yet again
Of you I would frain,
Why come ye not to court?-
To which court?
To the king's court,                                          400
Or to Hampton Court?<67>
Nay, to the king's court:
The king's court
Should have the excellence;
But Hampton Court
Hath the preeminence,
And York's Place,<68>
With my lord's grace,
To whose magnificence
Is all the confluence,                                        410
Suits and supplications,
Embassades of all nations.<69>
Straw for law canon,
Or for the law common,
Or for law civil!
It shall be as he will:
Stop at law tancrete,
An abstract or a concrete;
Be it sour, be it sweet,
His wisdom is so discreet,                                    420
That, in a fume or an heat,
Warden of the Fleet,
Set him fast by the feet!
And of his royal power
When him list to lower,
Then, Have him to the Tower,
Saunz aulter remedy,<70>
Have him forth, by and by
To the Marshalsea,
Or to the King's Bench!                                       430
He diggeth so in the trench
Of the court royal
That he ruleth them all.
So he doth undermine,
And such sleights doth find,
That the king's mind
By him is subverted,
And so straitly coarcted
In credencing his tales,
That all is but nut-shells                                    440
That any other sayeth;
He hath in him such faith.

Now, yet all this might be
Suffered and taken in gree,
If that that he wrought
To any good end were brought;
But all he bringeth to nought,
By God, that me dear bought!
He beareth the king on hand,<71>
That he must pill his land,                                   450
To make his coffers rich;
But he layeth all in the ditch,
And useth such abusion,
That in the conclusion
All cometh to confusion.
Perceive the cause why,
To tell the truth plainly,
He is so ambitious,
So shameless, and so vicious,
And so superstitious,                                         460
And so much oblivious
From whence that he came
That he falleth into a caeciam,<72>
Which, truly to express,
Is a forgetfulness,
Or wilful blindness,
Wherewith the Sodomites
Lost their inward sights,
The Gomorrhians also
Were brought to deadly woe,                                   470
As Scripture records:
A caecitate cordis,
In the Latin sing we
Libera nos, Domine! <73>

But this mad Amaleck,
Like to a Mamelek,<74>
He regardeth lords
No more than potsherds;
He is in such elation
Of his exaltation,                                            480
And the supportation
Of our sovereign lord,
That, God to record,<75>
He ruleth all at will,
Without reason or skill:
Howbeit the primordial
Of his wretched original,<76>
And his base progeny,
And his greasy genealogy,
He came of the sank royal<77>                                 490
That was cast out of a butcher's stall.

But however he was born,
Men would have the less scorn,
If he could consider
His birth and room together,
And call to his mind
How noble and how kind
To him he hath found
Our sovereign lord, chief ground
Of all this prelacy,                                          500
That set him nobly
In great authority,
Out from a low degree,
Which he cannot see:
For he was, pardie,
No doctor of divinity,
Nor doctor of the law,
Nor of none other saw;
But a poor master of art,
God wot, had little part                                      510
Of the quatrivials,
Nor yet of trivials,<78>
Nor of philosophy,
Nor of philology,
Nor of good policy,
Nor of astronomy,
Nor acquainted worth a fly
With honourable Haly,
Nor with royal Ptolemy,
Nor with Albumasar,<79>                                       520
To treat of any star
Fixed or else mobile;
His Latin tongue doth hobble,
He doth but clout and cobble
In Tully's faculty,
Called humanity;
Yet proudly he dare pretend
How no man can him amend:
But have ye not heard this,
How a one-eyed man is                                         530
Well-sighted when
He is among blind men?

Then, our process for to stable,
This man was full unable
To reach to such degree,
Had not our Prince be
Royal Henry the Eight,
Take him in such conceit,<80>
That he set him on height,
In exemplifying<81>                                           540
Great Alexander the king,
In writing as we find;
Which of his royal mind,
And of his noble pleasure,
Transcending out of measure,
Thought to do a thing
That pertaineth to a king,
To make up one of nought,
And made to him be brought
A wretched poor man,<82>                                      550
Which his living wan
With planting of leeks
By the days and by the weeks,
And of this poor vassal
He made a king royal,
And gave him a realm to rule
That occupied a showell,<83>
A mattock, and a spade,
Before that he was made
A king, as I have told,                                       560
And ruled as he wold.
Such is a king's power,
To make within an hour,
And work such a miracle,
That shall be a spectacle
Of renown and worldly fame:
In likewise now the same
Cardinal is promoted,
Yet with lewd conditions quoted,<84>
As hereafter ben noted,                                       570
Presumption and vainglory,
Envy, wrath, and lechery,
Covetise and gluttony,
Slothful to do good,
Now frantic, now stark wood.

Should this man of such mode
Rule the sword of might,
How can he do right?
For he will as soon smite
His friend as his foe;                                        580
A proverb long ago.

Set up a wretch on high
In a throne triumphantly,
Make him a great estate,<85>
And he will play checkmate<86>
With royal majesty,
Count himself as good as he;
A prelate potential,
To rule under Belial,
As fierce and as cruel                                        590
As the Fiend of hell.
His servants menial
He doth revile, and brawl,
Like Mahound in a play;<87>
No man dare him withsay:
He hath despite and scorn
At them that be well-born;
He rebukes them and rails:
Ye whoresons, ye vassails,
Ye knaves, ye churl's sons,                                   600
Ye ribalds, not worth two plumes,
Ye rain-beaten beggars rejagged,
Ye recrayed ruffians all ragged,
With Stoop, thou havel,<88>
Run, thou javel!
Thou peevish pie pecked,<89>
Thou losel long-necked!
Thus, daily, they be decked,
Taunted and checked,
That they are so woe,                                         610
They wot not whither to go.

No man dare come to the speech
Of this gentle Jack-breech,<90>
Of what estate he be,
Of spiritual dignity,
Nor duke of high degree,
Nor marquis, earl nor lord;
Which shrewdly doth accord,
Thus he born so base
All noblemen should out-face,                                 620
His countenance like a kaiser.
My Lord is not at leisure;
Sir, ye must tarry a stound,<91>
Till better leisure be found;
And, sir, ye must dance attendance,
And take patient sufferance,
For my lords Grace
Hath now no time nor space
To speak with you as yet.
And thus they shall sit                                       630
Chose them sit or flit,
Stand, walk, or ride,
And at his leisure abide
Perchance, half a year,
And yet never the near.<92>

This dangerous dowsypere,<93>
Like a king's peer;
And within this xvi. year
He would have been right fain
To have been a chaplain,                                      640
And have taken right great pain
With a poor knight,<94>
Whatsoever he hight.
The chief of his own council,
They cannot well tell
When they with him should mell,
He is so fierce and fell;
He rails and he rates,
He calleth them doddy-pates;
He grins and he gapes,                                        650
As it were jackanapes.
Such a mad bedlam<95>
For to rule this realm,
It is a wondrous case:
That the king's grace
Is toward him so minded,
And so far blinded,
That he cannot perceive
How he doth him deceive,
I doubt lest by sorcery,                                      660
Or such other loselry,
As witchcraft, or charming;
For he is the king's darling,
And his sweet heart-root,
And is governed by this mad coot: 
For what is a man the better
For the king's letter?
For he will tear it asunder;<96>
Whereat much I wonder,
How such a hoddipole                                          670
So boldly dare control,
And so malapertly withstand
The king's own hand,
And sets not by it a mite;<97>
He sayeth the king doth write
And writeth he wotteth not what;
And yet, for all that,
The king his clemency
Dispenseth with his demency.

But what His Grace doth think                                 680
I have no pen nor ink
That therewith can mell;
But well I can tell 
How Francis Petrarch,<98>
That much noble clerk,
Writeth how Charlemagne
Could not himself refrain,
But was ravished with a rage
Of a like dotage:
But how that came about                                       690
Read ye the story out,
And ye shall find surely
It was by necromancy,
By carects and conjuration
Under a certain constellation,
And a certain fumigation,
Under a stone on a gold ring,
Wrought to Charlemagne the king,
Which constrained him forcibly
For to love a certain body                                    700
Above all other inordinately.
This is no fable nor no lie;
At Acon it was brought to pass,<99>
As by mine author tried it was. 
But let my masters mathematical
Tell you the rest! For me, they shall;
They have the full intelligence,
And dare use the experience,
In their absolute conscience
To practise such obsolete science;                            710
For I abhor to smatter
Of one so devilish a matter.

But I will make further relation
Of this isagogical collation,<100>
How Master Gaguine, the chronicler<101>
Of the feats of war
That were done in France,
Maketh remembrance,
How King Lewis of late
Made up a great estate<102>                                   720
Of a poor wretched man,
Whereof much care began.
Iohannes Balua was his name,
Mine author writeth the same;
Promoted was he
To a cardinal's dignity
By Lewis the king aforesaid,
With him so well apayed
That he made him his chancellor
To make all or to mar,                                        730
And to rule as him list,<103>
Till he checked at the fist,<104>
And, again all reason,
Committed open treason
And against his lord sovereign;<105>
Wherefore he suffered pain,
Was headed, drawn, and quartered,
And died stinkingly martyred.
Lo, yet for all that
He wore a cardinal's hat,                                     740
In him was small faith,
As mine author sayeth:
Not for that I mean
Such a casualty should be seen,
Or such chance should fall
Unto our cardinal.

Almighty God, I trust,
Hath for him discussed
That of force he must
Be faithful, true, and just                                   750
To our most royal king,
Chief root of his making;
Yet it is a wily mouse
That can build his dwelling house
Within the cat's ear,<106>
Without dread or fear.
It is a nice reckoning,
To put all the governing,
All the rule of this land
Into one man's hand:                                          760
One wise man's head
May stand somewhat in stead:
But the wits of many wise
Much better can devise,
By their circumspection,
And their sad direction,
To cause the common weal
Long to endure in heal.
Christ keep King Henry the Eight
From treachery and deceit,                                    770
And grant him grace to know
The falcon from the crow,
The wolfe from the lamb,
From whence that mastiff came!
Let him never confound
The gentle greyhound:<107>
Of this matter the ground
Is easy to expound,
And soon may be perceived,
How the world is conveyed.                                    780

But hark, my friend, one word
In earnest or in bourd:
Tell me now, in this stead,
Is Master Meautis<108> dead,
The king's French secretary,
And his untrue adversary?
For he sent in writing
To Francis, the French king,
Of our master's counsel in every thing:
That was a perilous reckoning!-                               790
Nay, nay, he is not dead;
But he was so pained in the head,
That he shall never eat more bread.
Now he is gone to another stead
With a bull under lead,<109>
By way of commission,
To a strange jurisdiction
Called Dimmings Dale,<110>
Farre beyond Portingale,
And hath his passport to pass                                 800
Ultra Sauromatas,<111>
To the devil, Sir Satanas,
To Pluto, and Sir Belial,
The Devil's vicar general,
And to his college conventual,
As well calodemonial,
As to cacodemonial,
To purvey for our cardinal
A palace pontificial,
To keep his court provincial,                                 810
Upon articles judicial,
To contend and to strive
For his prerogative,
Within that consistory
To make summons peremptory
Before some protonotary
Imperial or papal.
Upon this matter mystical
I have told you part, but not all:
Hereafter perchance I shall                                   820
Make a larger memorial,
And a further rehearsal,
And more paper I think to blot,
To the court why I came not;
Desiring you above all thing
To keep you from laughing
When ye fall to reading
Of this wanton scroll,
And pray for Meautis' soul,
For he is well past and gone;                                 830
That would God everichon
Of his affinity
Were gone as well as he!
Amen, amen, say ye,
Of your inward charity;
Amen,
Of your inward charity.

It were great ruth,
For writing of truth,
Any man should be                                             840
In perplexity
Of displeasure;
For I make you sure,
Where truth is abhorred
It is a plain record
That there wanteth grace;
In whose place
Doth occupy,
Full ungraciously,
False flattery,                                               850
False treachery,
False bribery,
Subtle Sim Sly,
With mad folly;
For who can best lie
He is best set by.
Then farewell to thee,
Wealthful felicity!
For prosperity
Away then will flee.                                          860
Then must we agree
With poverty;
For misery,
With penury,
Miserably
And wretchedly
Hath made ascry
And outcry,
Following the chase
To drive away grace.                                          870
Yet sayest thou percase,
We can lack no grace,
For my lord's grace,
And my lady's grace,
With trey, deuce, ace,
And ace in the face,
Some haut and some base,
Some dance the trace
Ever in one case:
Mark me that chase                                            880
In the tennis play,<112>
For cinque quater trey<113>
Is a tall man:
He rode, but we ran!
Hey the gye and the gan!<114>
The grey goose is no swan;
The waters wax wan,<115>
And beggars they ban,
And they cursed Datan,
De tribu Dan,<116>                                            890
That this work began,
Palam et clam,<117>
With Balak and Balam,
The golden ram
Of Fleming dam,
Shem, Japhet, or Ham.

But how come to pass
Your cupboard<118> that was
Is turned to glass,
From silver to brass,                                         900
From gold to pewter,
Or else to a neuter,
To copper, to tin,
To lead, or alcumin?
A goldsmith your mayor;<119>
But the chief of your fair
Might stand now by potters,
And such as sell trotters:
Pitchers, potsherds,
This shrewdly accords                                         910
To be a cupboard for lords.

My lord now, and sir knight,
Good even and good night!
For now, Sir Tristram,<120>
You must wear buckram,
Or canvas of Caen,
For silks are wane.
Our royals that shone,
Our nobles are gone
Among the Burgunians,                                         920
And Spaniards onions,
And the Flanderkins.
Gill sweats, and Kate spins,
They are happy that wins;
But England may well say,
Fie on this winning all way!
Now nothing but pay, pay!
With, laugh and lay down,<121>
Borough, city, and town.

Good Spring of Langham<122>                                   930
Must count what became
Of his cloth-making:
He is at such taking,
Though his purse wax dull,
He must tax for his wool<123>
By nature of a new writ;
My lord's Grace nameth it
A quia non satisfacit:<124>
In the spite of his teeth
He must pay again                                             940
A thousand or twain
Of his gold in store;
And yet he paid before
An hundred pound and more,
Which pincheth him sore.
My lord's Grace will bring
Down this high spring,
And bring it so low
It shall not ever flow.

Such a prelate, I trow,                                       950
Were worthy to row
Through the straits of Marock<125>
To the gibbet of Baldock:<126>
He would dry up the streams
Of ix. kings' reams,
All rivers and wells,
All waters that swells;
For with us he so mells
That within England dwells,
I would he were somewhere else;                               960
For else by and by
He will drink us so dry,
And suck us so nigh,
That men shall scantly
Have penny or halfpenny.
God save his noble Grace,
And grant him a place
Endless to dwell
With the Devil of hell!
For, an he were there,                                        970
We need never fear
Of the fiends black:
For I undertake
He would so brag and crake,
That he would then make
The devils to quake,<127>
To shudder and to shake,
Like a fire-drake,
And with a coal-rake
Bruise them on a brake,<128>                                  980
And bind them to a stake,
And set hell on fire,
At his own desire.
He is such a grim sire,<129>
He is such a potestolate,
And such a potestate,
That he would break the brains
Of Lucifer in his chains,
And rule them each one
In Lucifer's throne.                                          990
I would he were gone;
For among us is none
That ruleth but he alone,
Without all good reason,
And all out of season.
For Fulham peason
With him be not geason;
They grow very rank
Upon every bank
Of his arbours green,                                        1000
With my lady bright and sheen;<130>
On their game it is seen
They play not all clean,
An it be as I ween.

But as touching discretion,
With sober direction,
He keepeth them in subjection:
They can have no protection
To rule nor to guide,
But all must be tried,                                       1010
And abide the correction
Of his wilful affection.
For as for wit,
The Devil speed whit!<131>
But brainsick and brainless,
Witless and reckless,
Careless and shameless,
Thriftless and graceless,
Together are bended,
And so condescended,                                         1020
That the commonwealth
Shall never have good health,
But tattered and tugged,
Ragged and rugged,
Shaven and shorn,
And all threadbare worn.
Such greediness,
Such neediness,
Miserableness,
With wretchedness,                                           1030
Hath brought in distress
And much heaviness
And great dolour
England, the flower
Of relucent honour,
In old commemoration
Most royal English nation.
Now all is out of fashion,
Almost in desolation;
I speak by protestation:                                     1040
God of his miseration
Send better reformation!

Lo, for to do shamefully
He judgeth it no folly!
But to write of his shame
He sayeth we are to blame.
What a frenzy is this,
No shame to do amiss,
And yet he is ashamed
To be shamefully named!                                      1050
And oft preachers be blamed
Because they have proclaimed
His madness by writing,
His simpleness reciting,
Remording and biting,
With chiding and with flyting,
Showing him God's laws:
He calleth the preachers daws,
And of holy scripture's saws
He counteth them for gee-gaws,                               1060
And putteth them to silence
And with words of violence,<132>
Like Pharaoh, void of grace,
Did Moses sore menace,
And Aaron sore he threat,
The word of God to let;
This maumet in like wise
Against the Church doth rise;
The preacher he doth despise,
With craking in such wise,                                   1070
So bragging all with boast,
That no preacher almost
Dare speake for his life
Of my lord's Grace, nor his wife,
For he hath such a bull,
He may take whom he wull,
And as many as him likes;
May eat pigs in Lent for pikes,
After the sects of heretics,
For in Lent he will eat                                      1080
All manner of flesh meat
That he can anywhere get;
With other abusions great,
Whereof for to treat
It would make the Devil to sweat,
For all privileged places<133>
He breaks and defaces,
All places of religion
He hath them in derision,
And maketh such provision                                    1090
To drive them at division, 
And finally in conclusion
To bring them to confusion;
Saint Alban's to record<134>
Whereof this ungracious lord
Hath made himself abbot,
Against their wills, God wot.
All this he doth deal
Under strength of the great seal,
And by his legacy,<135>                                      1100
Which madly he doth apply
Unto an extravagancy
Picked out of all good law,
With reasons that ben raw.
Yet, when he took first his hat,
He said he knew what was what;
All justice he pretended,
All things should be amended,
All wrongs he would redress,
All injuries he would repress,                               1110
All perjuries he would oppress;
And yet this graceless elf,
He is perjured himself,<136>
As plainly it doth appear
Who list to inquire
In the registry
Of my Lord of Canterbury, 
To whom he was professed
In three points expressed;
The first, to do him reverence,                              1120
The second, to owe him obedience,
The third, with whole affection
To be under his subjection:
But now he maketh objection,
Under the protection
Of the king's great seal,
That he setteth never a deal
By his former oath,<137>
Whether God be pleased or wroth.
He maketh so proud pretence,                                 1130
That in his equipollence
He judgeth him equivalent:
To God omnipotent:
But yet beware the rod,
And the stroke of God!

The apostle Peter
Had a poor mitre
And a poor cope
When he was create Pope,
First in Antioch;                                            1140
He did never approach
Of Rome to the See
With such dignity.

Saint Dunstan, what was he?
Nothing, he sayeth, like to me:
There is a diversity
Between him and me;
We pass him in degree,
As legatus a latere.

Ecce, sacerdos magnus,<138>                                  1150
That will head us and hang us,
And straitly strangle us
An he may fang us!<139>
Decree and decretal,
Constitution provincial,
Nor no law canonical,
Shall let the priest pontifical
To sit in causa sanguinis.<140>
Now God amend that is amiss!
For I suppose that he is                                     1160
Of Jeremy the whisking rod,
The flail, the scourge of Almighty God.

This Naman Sirus,<141>
So fell and so irous,
So full of melancholy,
With a flap afore his eye,
Men ween that he is pocky,<142>
Or else his surgeons they lie,
For, as far as they can spy
By the craft of surgery                                      1170
It is manus Domini.<143>
And yet this proud Antiochus,
He is so ambitious,
So elate, and so vicious,
And so cruel-hearted,
That he will not be converted;
For he setteth God apart,
He is now so overthwart,
And so pained with pangs,
That all his trust hangs                                     1180
In Balthasar<144>, which healed
Domingo's nose that was whealed;
That Lombard's nose mean I,
That standeth yet awry;
It was not healed alderbest,
It standeth somewhat on the west;
I mean Domingo Lomelin<145>
That was wont to win
Much money of the king
At the cards and hazarding:                                  1190
Balthasar, that healed Domingo's nose
From the pustuled pocky pose,
Now with his gums of Araby
Hath promised to heal our cardinal's eye;
Yet some surgeons put a doubt
Lest he will put it clean out,
And make him lame of his nether limbs.
God send him sorrow for his sins!

Some men might ask a question,
By whose suggestion                                          1200
I took on hand this wark,
Thus boldly for to bark?
An men list to hark,
And my words mark,
I will answer like a clerk;
For, truly and unfeigned,
I am forcibly constrained
At Juvenal's request,
To write of this glorious gest,
Of this vainglorious best,                                   1210
His fame to be increased
At every solemn feast;
Quia difficile est
Satiram non scribere.<146>
Now, master doctor, how say ye,
Whatsoever your name be?
What though ye be nameless,
Ye shall not escape blameless,
Nor yet shall 'scape shameless:
Master doctor, in your degree,                               1220
Yourself madly ye oversee;
Blame Juvenal, and blame not me.
Master doctor Diricum,
Omne animi vitium, &c.<147>
As Juvenal doth record,
A small default in a great lord,
A little crime in a great estate,
Is much more inordinate,
And more horrible to behold,
Than any other a thousandfold.                               1230
Ye put to blame ye wot ne'er whom;
Ye may wear a cock's-comb;
Your fond head in your furred hood,
Hold ye your tongue, ye can no good:
And at more convenient time
I may fortune for to rhyme
Somewhat of your madness;
For small is your sadness
To put any man in lack,
And say ill behind his back:                                 1240
And my words mark truly,
That ye cannot bide thereby,
For smegma non est cinnamonum,<148>
But de absentibus nil nisi bonum.<149>
Complain, or do what ye will,
Of your complaint it shall not skill:
This is the tenor of my bill,
A dawcock ye be, and so shall be still.



NOTES TO WHY COME YE NOT TO COURT?

1. This poem appears to have been produced (at intervals perhaps)
during 1522 and part of the following year.

2. ALL noble men, &c.] These twenty-eight introductory lines,
which are found in all the eds. of this poem, are also printed, as
a distinct piece, in the various editions of Certain books
compiled by Master Skelton, &c., n.d., and in Marshe's ed. of
Skelton's Works, 1568.

3. Haec vates ille,
De quo loquuntur mille.] "This (is) the poet thousands are talking
about."

4. overage] Seems here to be-over-age (excessive age); while,
again, in our author's poem The Doughty Duke of Albany, it appears
to be-over-rage (excessive rage);

"It is a reckless rage,
And a lunatic overage."
v. 417.

5. A grande dommage] "A great pity" (Fr.)

6. In faith, deacon, thou crew] See note 38 to The Bowge of Court.

7. The countering at Cales] countering does not, I apprehend,
mean-encountering, but is a musical term (see note 1 to Against a
Comely Custron) used here metaphorically, as in other parts of
Skelton's works. The allusion seems to be to the meeting between
Henry the Eighth and Francis in 1520, when (as perhaps few readers
need be informed) Henry went over to Calais, proceeded thence to
Guisnes, and met Francis in the fields between the latter town and
Ardres. If "Cales" (the reading of the manuscript) is to be
understood as-Cadiz (See note 23 to Against Venomous Tongues) I
know not any occurrence there of sufficient consequence to suit
the present passage.

8. We may blow at the coal] See note 78 to The Garland of Laurel.

9. Mock hath lost her shoe] See note 188 to The Garland of Laurel

10. As right as a ram's horn] See note 129 to Colyn Cloute.

11. all to-torn] i.e. torn to pieces. See note 14 to Divers
Ballads and Ditties Solacious

12. Favell] i.e. Flattery. See note 10 to The Bowge of Court.

13. Javell] See note 192 to Magnificence.

14. Havell] Which occurs again in v. 604, is a term of reproach
found less frequently than javel in our early writers: whether it
be connected with haveril,-one who havers (see the Gloss. to The
Towneley Myst. in v. Hawvelle), I cannot pretend to determine.

15. Harvy Hafter] See note 14 to The Bowge of Court.

16. Jack Travell] Among payments made in the year 1428 (in the
reign of Hen. vi.), Jack Travel occurs as the name of a real
person; "Et a Iakke Travaill et ses compaignons, feisans diverses
Jeues et Enterludes, dedeins le Feste de Noell, devant nostre dit
Sire le Roi," &c. ("And to Jack Travel and his companions, making
various plays and interludes before our lord the King") Rymer's
Foed. T. iv. p. 133.

17. reason and . . . skill] See note 14 to Magnificence.

18. roast a stone] So Heywood;

"I do but roast a stone
In warming her."
Dialogue; &c. sig. F 2,-Works, ed. 1598.

19. no man but one] i.e. Wolsey.

20. This bill well over-looked] i.e. This writing being well
overlooked, examined.

21. There went the hare away] A proverbial expression:

"Man. By my faith, a little season
I followed the counsel and diet of reason
Gloto. There went the hare away;
His diet quod-a," &c.
Medwall's Interlude of Nature, n. d., sig. g ii

". . . here's the King, nay stay
And here, ay, here: there goes the Hare away."
The Spanish Tragedy (by Kyd), sig. G 3. ed. 1618.

22. the buck] Qy. does Skelton, under these names of animals,
allude to certain persons? If he does, "the buck" must mean Edward
Duke of Buckingham, who, according to the popular belief, was
impeached and brought to the block by Wolsey's means in 1521: so
in an unprinted poem against the Cardinal;

"Wherefore never look their mouths to be stopped
Till ther money be restored, though some heads be off chopped
As thou did serve the Buck;
For as men say, by thee that was done
That since had this land no good luck."
MS. Harl. 2252. fol. 158.

23. tot quot] See note 74 to Colyn Cloute. "A general
dispensation." Halliwell.

24. linsey-woolsey] A cloth made from a mixture of wool and linen.
Here, an evident play on the Cardinal's name.

25. Opus male dulce] "Sweet evil work."

26. Bothombar] I know not what place is meant here.

27. gup, level suse!] level suse, or level-sice, (levez sus?) is
the same as level-coil (levez cul?), a noisy Christmas game, in
which one player hunted another from his seat; hence applied to
any riot or disturbance. Level-coil was also applied to games of
skill, when, three persons playing, two at a time, the loser gave
up his place and sat out. See Halliwell's Dict.

28. not worth a fly] A common expression in our early poetry.;

"The goose said then all this nis worth a fly"
Chaucer's Ass. of Fowls,-Works, fol. 235. Ed.1602

29. Yet the good Earl of Surrey,
The French men he doth fray, &c.] This nobleman (before mentioned,
see note 102 to The Garland of Laurel), Thomas Howard (afterwards
third Duke of Norfolk), commanded, in 1522, the English force
which was sent against France, when Henry the Eighth and the
Emperor Charles had united in an attack on that kingdom. In Stow's
Annales, p. 517. ed. 1615, the marginal note "Earl of Surrey brent
Morlais in Brittainy. I. Skelton," evidently alludes to the
present passage of our poem. Both Turner and Lingard in their
Histories of Engl. mistake this nobleman for his father.

30. mated] i.e. confounded I may just observe that Palsgrave,
besides "I Mate at the chesses, Je matte," gives "I Mate or
overcome, Je amatte." p. 633.

31. scutus] "Scutum, Moneta Regum Francorum, ita appellata quod in
ea descripta essent Franciae insignia in scuto." ("Scutum, a coin
of the kingdom of France, so called because it had the arms of
France in a shield") Du Cange's Gloss. (Ital. scudo, Fr. écu).

32. They shot at him with crowns, &c.] On the immense gifts and
annuities which Wolsey received from foreign powers, see Turner's
Hist. of Reign of Hen. the Eighth, i. 236. ed. 8vo.

33. his eyen so dazed]-dazed, i.e. dazzled, or, according to
Skelton's distinction-dulled; for in his Garland of Laurel we find
"eye dazzled and dazed." v. 1389.

34. ne see can] i.e. can not see.

35. the Chamber of Stars] i.e. the Star-Chamber, a special court
used for trying political cases.

36. Good even, good Robin Hood] This was, as Ritson observes, a
proverbial expression; "the allusion is to civility extorted by
fear." Robin Hood, i. lxxxvii. Warton mistook the meaning of this
line, as is proved by his mode of pointing it: see Hist. of E. P.,
ii. 346. ed. 4to.

37. thwarting over them] i.e. overthwarting them, perversely
controlling them.

38. With, Trump up, Alleluia] i.e. says Warton, " the pomp in 
which he celebrates divine service." Hist. of E. P., ii. 346
(note), ed. 4to. Compare Wager's Mary Magdalene, 1567;

"Ite Missa est, with pipe up, Alleluia."
Sig. A iii.
Ite missa est-the last words of the Mass.

39. Philargyria] i.e. f??a?????a, argenti amor, pecuniae
cupiditas.("Love of money") She was one of the characters in
Skelton's lost drama, The Necromancer.

40. Asmodeus] The name of the evil spirit in the Book of Tobit.

41 Dalyda] i.e. Delilah.

"Unto his lemman Dalida he told,
That in his hairs all his strength lay."
Chaucer's Monk's Tale, v. 14069. ed. Tyr.

See too Gower's Conf. Am., Lib. viii. fol. clxxxix. ed. 1554, and
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. i. leaf xxxiii. ed. Wayland.

42. Castrimergia] "The true reading is CASTRIMARGIA, or Gulae
concupiscentia, Gluttony. From the Greek, Gast??µa???a, ingluvies,
Hellvatio. Not an uncommon word in the monkish latinity. Du Cange
cites an old Litany of the tenth century, A spiritu CASTRIMARGIAE
Libera nos, domine!' ("Free us from the demon of gluttony, Lord!")
Lat. Gloss. i. p. 398. Carpentier adds, among other examples, from
the statutes of the Cistercian order, 1375 [1357], 'Item, cum
propter detestabile CASTRIMARGIAE vitium in labyrinthum vitiorum
descendatur, &c: ("Item, because of the detestable vice of
gluttony, he would be brought down into the labyrinth of vice.")
Suppl. tom. i. p. 862: Warton's Hist. of E. P., ii. 346 (note), ed
4to.

43. In Lent for a repast, &c.] So Roy in his satire against
Wolsey, Read me, and be not wroth, &c.;

"Wat. What abstinence useth he to take?
Jeff. In Lent all fish he doth forsake,
Fed with partriges and plovers.
Wat. He leadeth then a Lutheran's life?
Jeff. O nay, for he hath no wife,
But whores that be his lovers."
Harl. Miscel. ix. 32. ed. Park.

44. partridge mewed]-mewed, i.e. cooped up. "I keep partridges in
a mew against your coming." Hormanni Vulgaria, sig. e ii. ed.
1530.

45. The sign of the Cardinal Hat] "These allowed Stewhouses [in
Southwark] had Signs on their Fronts, towards the Thames, not
hanged out, but painted on the Walls, as a Boar's-Head, the Cross
Keys, the Gun, the Castle, the Crane, the Cardinal's Hat," &c.
Stow's Survey, B. iv. 7. ed. 1720.

46. Will ye bear no coals] Steevens, in his note on the opening of
Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, cites the present line among the
examples which he gives of the expression to bear or carry coals,
i.e. to bear insults, to submit to degradation. In the royal
residences and great houses the lowest drudges appear to have been
selected to carry coals to the kitchens, halls, &c.; see note on
Jonson's Works, ii. 169, by Gifford, who afterwards (p. 179)
observes, "From the mean nature of this occupation it seems to
have been somewhat hastily concluded, that a man who would carry
coals would submit to any indignity."

47. A meiny of mare foals] i.e. (as appears from the expressions
applied to horses four lines above) a set of marefoals, fillies.

48. Huntley banks] See note 25 to Against the Scots.

49. Lord Dacres] Thomas Lord Dacre (of Gillesland, or of the
North) was warden of the West Marches. The accusation here thrown
out against him (because, perhaps, he was on the best terms with
Wolsey) of "agreeing too well with the Scots" is altogether
unfounded. He was for many years the able and active agent of
Henry in corrupting by gold and intrigues the nobles of Scotland,
and in exciting ceaseless commotions in that kingdom, to the
destruction of its tranquillity and good government. He died in
1525. And see notes 52 and 60 below.

50. Jack Rakers] See note 43 to Poems Against Garnesche.

51. the red hat] i.e. Wolsey.

52. Lord Rose] i.e. Thomas Manners, Lord Roos. In 14 Henry viii. 
he was constituted warden of the East Marches towards Scotland;
and by letters patent in 17 Henry viii. he was created Earl of
Rutland. He died in 1543. See Collins's Peerage, i. 465. sqq. ed.
Brydges. Hall makes the following mention of him: "In this summer
[xiiii year of Henry the viii] the lord Ross and the lord Dacres
of the North which were appointed to keep the borders against
Scotland did so valiantly that they burned the good town of Kelso
and lxxx. villages and overthrew xviii. towers of stone with all
their Barnkyns or Bulwarks." Chron. fol. ci. ed. 1548.

53. a cockly fose] A term which I do not understand. (Cockly means
wrinkled, but what a fose is, is more than I can tell).

54. Their hearts be in their hose] See note 52 to A Replication.

55. The Earl of Northumberland, &c.] i.e. Henry Algernon Percy,
fifth Earl of Northumberland. In 14 Henry viii. he was made warden
of the whole Marches, a charge which for some reason or other he
soon after resigned: vide Collins's Peerage, ii. 305. ed. Brydges.
That he found himself obliged to pay great deference to the
Cardinal, is evident from Cavendish's Life of Wolsey, where (pp.
120-128. ed. 1827) see the account of his being summoned from the
north, &c. when his son Lord Percy, (who was then, according to
the custom of the age, a "servitor" in Wolsey's house) had become
enamoured of Anne Boleyn. This nobleman, who encouraged
literature, and appears to have patronised our poet (see Some
Account of Skelton and his Writings), died in 1527.

56. Mastiff cur . . . butcher's dog] i.e. Wolsey: see note 153 to
Speak, Parrot.

57. Serjeants of the coife] The Serjeants-at-Law were an order of
barristers at the English bar. The Serjeants had for many
centuries exclusive jurisdiction over the Court of Common Pleas,
being the only lawyers allowed to argue a case there. At the same
time they had rights of audience in the other central common law
courts (the Court of King's Bench and Exchequer of Pleas) and
precedence over all other lawyers. Only Serjeants-at-Law could
become judges of these courts right up into the 19th century.
Serjeants wore a special and distinctive dress, the chief feature
of which was the coif, a white lawn or silk skullcap, afterwards
represented by a round piece of white lace at the top of the wig.
(Wikipedia)

58. well thewed] i.e. well mannered.

59. the Scottish king] i.e. James the Fifth.

60. There goeth many a lie
Of the Duke of Albany] This passage relates to the various rumours
which were afloat concerning the Scottish affairs in 1522, during
the regency of John Duke of Albany. (The last and disastrous
expedition of Albany against England in 1523 had not yet taken
place: its failure called forth from Skelton a long and furious
invective against the Duke;-The Doughty Duke Of Albany. In 1522,
when Albany with an army eighty thousand strong had advanced to
Carlisle, Lord Dacre, by a course of able negotiations, prevailed
on him to agree to a truce for a month and to disband his forces:
see Hist. of Scot., v. 156 sqq. by Tytler,-who defends the conduct
of Albany on this occasion from the charge of cowardice and
weakness.

61. The mountenaunce of two hours] "Mowntenaunce. Quantitas.
Estimata mensura." ("Quntity, measured amount") Prompt. Parv. ed.
1499.

"And largely the mountenaunce of an hour
They gone on it to read and to pore."
Chaucer's Troil. and Cress., B. ii. fol. 157. Works, ed. 1602.

"Racing and foining to the mountenaunce of an hour." Morte
d'Arthur, B. vii. cap. iiii. vol. i. 191. ed. Southey.

62. What hear ye of Mutrell?]-Mutrell is Montreuil; and the
allusion must be to some attack intended or actual on that town,
of which I can find no account agreeing with the date of the
present poem. To suppose that the reference is to the siege of
Montreuil in 1544, would be equivalent to pronouncing that the
passage is an interpolation by some writer posterior to the time
of Skelton.

63. For dread of the red hat
Take pepper in the nose] i.e. For dread that the Cardinal, Wolsey,
take offence.

"He taketh pepper in the nose, that I complain
Upon his faults."
Heywood's Dialogue, &c. sig. G.,-Works, ed. 1598.

64. Off by the hard arse] Compare the Interlude of the iiii
Elementes, n. d.;

"Yea but yet I served another worse:
I smote off his leg by the hard arse
As soon as I met him there."
Sig. E i.

65. makes our sire to glum.] i.e. makes our lord (Wolsey) have a
gloomy or sour look.

66. go or ride] i.e. walk or ride. See note 19 to Philip Sparrow.

67. Hampton Court] The palace of Wolsey; which he afterwards, with
all its magnificent furniture, presented to the King.

68. York's Place] The palace of Wolsey, as Archbishop of York,
which he had furnished in the most sumptuous manner: after his
disgrace, it became a royal residence, under the name of
Whitehall.

69. To whose magnificence, &c. . . . 
Embassades of all nations]-Embassades, i.e. Embassies. "All
ambassadors of foreign potentates were always dispatched by his
discretion, to whom they had always access for their dispatch. His
house was always resorted and furnished with noblemen, gentlemen,
and other persons, with going and coming in and out, feasting and
banqueting all ambassadors diverse times, and other strangers
right nobly." Cavendish's Life of Wolsey, p. 112. ed. 1827.

70. Sanz aulter remedy] i.e Without any remedy.

71. He beareth the king on hand]-beareth on hand, i.e. leads on to
a belief, persuades.

"Lordings, right thus, as ye han understood,
Bare I stiffly mine old husbands on hand,
That thus they saiden in hir drunkenness."
Chaucer's Wife of Bath's Prol., 5961. ed. Tyr.

"He is my countryman: as he beareth me on hand,-uti mihi vult
persuasum." ("As he wishes me to be persuaded") Hormanni Vulgaria,
sig. X viii. ed. 1530. The expression occurs in a somewhat
different sense in our author's Magnificence, see note 31 to that
work.

72. a caeciam] "Caecia, s??t?d???a [a vertigo with loss of
sight]." Du Cange's Gloss. The editions give Acisiam. Qy. is
"accidiam" ("sloth") the right reading? ("Acedia, accidia . . .
taedium . . . tristitia, molestia, anxietas" &c. (Greek a??d?a):
see Du Cange)? See also v. 472.

73. A caecitate cordis, . . Libera nos, Domine!] "From blindness
of heart, deliver us, O Lord!" PH

74. a Mamelek] i.e. a Mameluke, a member of a Muslim warrior caste
in the Middle East. They drove out the Crusaders, and subsequently
became rulers of Egypt 1254-1517.

"And crafty inquisitors,
Worse than Mamalokes." 
The Image of Hypocrisy, Part Four.

75. God to record] i.e. God to witness.

76. the primordial
Of his wretched original] primordial, i.e. first beginning.

77. sank royal] i.e. royal blood.

78. quadrivials . . . trivials] See note 74 to Speak, Parrot. This
depreciation of' Wolsey's acquirements is very unjust: his
learning, there is reason to believe, was far from contemptible.

79. Haly . . Albumasar] See notes 57 and 58 to Philip Sparrow.

80. conceit] i.e. good opinion, favour.

81. exemplifying] i.e. following the example of.

82. A wretched poor man, &c.] i.e. Abdalonimus (or Abdolonimus)
whom Alexander made king of Sidon: see Justin, xi. 10. Cowley
touches on the story at the commencement of Plant. Lib. iv. ; and
in his English version of that commencement, under the title of
The Country Life, he has greatly improved the passage.

83. occupied a showell] i.e. used a shovel: see note 8 to The
Death of King Edward IV

84. with lewd conditions quoted] i.e. quoted, noted, marked, with
evil qualities.

85. a great estate] i.e. a person of great estate, or rank.

86. play checkmate] In allusion to the king's being put in check
at the game of chess.

87. Like Mahound in a play] In none of the early miracle-plays
which have come down to us is Mahound (Mahomet) a character,
though he is mentioned and sworn by.

88. havel] See note 14 above.

89. peevish pie] i.e. silly magpie.

90. Jack-breech] i.e. Jack-ass (-arse).

91. My Lord is not at leisure!
Sir, ye must tarry a stound] a stound, i.e. a time, a while.
Compare A Character of the insolent behaviour of Cardinal Wolsey,
as given by Thomas Allen, Priest and Chaplain to the Earl of
Shrewsbury, in a Letter to his Lordship about Apr. 1517, among
Kenett's Collections,-MS. Lansd. 978. fol. 213. "Pleaseth your
Lordship to understand upon Monday was sennight last past I
delivered your Letter with the examination to my Lord Cardinal at
Guilford, whence he commanded me to wait on him to the Court. I
followed him and there gave attendance and could have no Answer.
Upon Friday last he came from thence to Hampton Court, where he
lieth. The morrow after I besought his Grace I might know his
pleasure; I could have no Answer. Upon Monday last as he walked in
the Park at Hampton Court, I besought his Grace I might know if he
would command me any service. He was not content with me that I
spoke to him. So that who shall be a Suitor to him may have no
other business but give attendance upon his pleasure. He that
shall so do, it is needful should be a wiser man then I am. I saw
no remedy, but came without Answer, except I would have done as my
Lord Dacre's Servant doth, who came with Letters for the King's
service five months since and yet hath no Answer. And another
Servant of the Deputy of Calais likewise who came before the other
to Walsingham, I heard, when he answered them, 'If ye be not
content to tarry my leisure, depart when ye will.' This is truth,
I had rather your Lordship commanded me to Rome than deliver him
Letters, and bring Answers to the same. When he walketh in the
Park he will suffer no Servant to come nigh him, but commands them
away as far as one might shoot an arrow."

92. never the near] near, i.e. nearer.

"That they were early up, and never the near."
Heywood's Dialogue, &c. sig. A 3,-Works, ed. 1598.

93. dangerous dowsypere] Dangerous i.e. arrogant, difficult to
please. "He hath a dangerous look: Atollit supercilium, adducit,
contrahit supercilia."-"I can not away with such dangerous
fellows: Ferre non possum horum supercilium, vel superciliosos,
arrogantes, fastuosos, vel arrogantiam, aut fastum talium."
Hormanni Vulgaria, sigs. L, I, P iiii. ed. 1530:-dowsypere, i.e.
lord, noble (properly,one of the Douze-Pairs of France);

"Earl, duke, and douch-spere."
Golagros and Gawain, p. 182,-Sir Gawain, &c. ed. Madden.

See too Spenser's Faerie Queene, iii. x. 31.

94. With a poor knight] "He [Wolsey] fell in acquaintance with one
Sir John Nanphant, a very grave and ancient knight, who had a
great room in Calais under King Henry the Seventh. This knight he
served, and behaved him so discreetly and justly, that he obtained
the special favour of his said master; inso much that for his wit,
gravity, and just behaviour, he committed all the charge of his
office unto his chaplain. And, as I understand, the office was the
treasurership of Calais, who was, in consideration of his great
age, discharged of his chargeable room, and returned again into
England, intending to live more at quiet. And through his instant
labour and especial favour his chaplain was promoted to the king's
service, and made his chaplain." Cavendish's Life cf Wolsey, p.
70. ed. 1827. According to Nash, it was Sir Richard Nanfan (father
of Sir John) who was "captain of Calais, made a knight, and
esquire of the body to Henry vii." Hist. of Worcestershire, i. 85.

95. bedlam] i.e. bedlamite, an inmate of Bethlem madhouse.

96. For he will tear it asunder] So Roy, in his satire against
Wolsey, Read me, and be not wroth,

"His power he doth so extend,
That the King's letters to rend
He will not forbear in his rage."
Harl. Miscell., ix. 69. ed. Park.

97. And sets not by it a mite] i.e. values it not at a mite, cares
not a mite for it.

98. How Francis Petrarch, &c.] (Translation below) "Vidi Aquensem
Caroli sedem, & in templo marmoreo verendum barbaris gentibus
illius principis sepulchrum, ubi fabellam audivi, non inamoenam
cognitu, a quibusdam templi sacerdotibus, quam scriptam mihi
ostenderunt, & postea apud modernos scriptores accuratius etiam
tractatam legi, quam tibi quoque ut referam incidit animus: ita
tamen, ut rei fides non apud me quaeratur, sed (ut aiunt) penes
auctores maneat. Carolum Regem quem Magni nomine [ed Bas.
cognomine] aequare Pompeio & Alexandro audent, mulierculam quandam
perdite & efflictim amasse memorant, eius blanditiis enervatum,
neglecta fama (cui plurimum inservire consueverat) & posthabitis
regni curis, aliarum rerum omnium & postremo suiipsius oblitum,
diu nulla prorsus in re nisi illius amplexibus acquievisse, summa
cum indignatione suorum ac dolore. Tandem cum iam spei nihil
superesset (quoniam aures regias salutaribus consiliis insanus
amor obstruxerat), foeminam ipsam malorum causam insperata mors
abstulit, cuius rei indigens primum in regia sed latens gaudium
fuit: deinde dolore tantum priore graviore, quantum foediori morbo
correptum regis animum videbant, cuius nec ruorte lenitus furor,
sed in ipsum obscoenum cadaver & exangue translatus est, quod
balsamo & aromatibus conditum, onustum gemmis, & velatum purpura,
diebus ac noctibus tam miserabili quam cupido fovebat amplexu.
Dici nequit quam discors & quam male se compassura conditio est
amantis ac regis: nunquam profecto contraria sine lite iunguntur.
Quid est autem regnum, nisi iusta & gloriosa dominatio? Contra
quid est amor, nisi foeda servitus & iniusta? Itaque cum certatim
ad amantem (seu rectius ad amentem) Regem, pro summis regni
negotiis legationes gentium, praefectique & provinciarum praesides
convenirent, is in lectulo suo miser, omnibus exclusis & obseratis
foribus, amato corpusculo cohaerebat, amicam suam crebro, velut
spirantem responsuramque compellans, illi curas laboresque suos
narrabat, illi blandum murmur & nocturna suspiria, illi semper
amoris comites lachrymas instillabat, horrendum miseria solamen,
sed quod unum ex omnibus Rex alioquin (ut aiunt) sapientissimus
elegisset. Addunt fabula quod ego nec fieri potuisse nec narrari
debere arbitror. Erat ea tempestate in aula Coloniensis Antistes
vir, ut memorant, sanctitate & sapientia clarus, necnon comis, et
consilii Regii prima vox, qui domini sui statum miseratus, ubi
animadvertit humanis remediis nihil agi, ad Deum versus, ilium
assidue precari, in illo spem reponere, ab eo finem mali poscere
multo cum gemitu: quod cum diu fecisset, nec desiturus videretur,
die quodam illustri miraculo recreatus est: siquidem ex more
sacrificanti, & post devotissimas preces pectus & aram lachryrmis
implenti, de coelo vox insonuit, Sub extinctae mulieris lingua
furoris Regii causam latere. Quo laetior, mox peracto sacrificio,
ad locum vbi corpus erat se proripuit, & iure notissimae
familiaritatis regiae introgressus, os digito clam scrutatus,
gemmam perexiguo annulo inclusam sub gelida rigentique lingua
repertam festinabundus avexit. Nec multo post rediens Carolus, &
ex consuetudine ad optatum mortua congressum properans, repente
aridi cadaveris spectaculo concussus, obriguit, exhorruitque
contactum, auferri eam quantocius ac sepeliri iubens. Inde totus
in Antistitem conversus, ilium amare, ilium colere, ilium Indies
arctius amplecti. Denique nihil nisi ex sententia illius agere, ab
illo nec diebus nec noctibus avelli. Quod ubi sensit vir iustus ac
prudens, optabilem forte multis sed onerosam sibi sarcinam
abiicere statuit, veritusque ne si vel ad manus alterius
perveniret, vel flammis consumeretur, domino suo aliquid periculi
afferret, annulum in vicinae paludis praeltam voraginem demersit.
Aquis forte tum rex cum proceribus suis habitabat, ex eoque
tempore cunctis civitatibus sedes illa praelata est, in ea nil
sibi palude gratius, ibi assidere & illis aquis mira cum
voluptate, illius odore velut suavissimo delectari. Postremo illuc
regiam suam transtulit, & in medio palustris limi, immenso sumptu,
iactis molibus, palatium templumque construxit, ut nihil divinae
vel humanae rei eum inde abstraheret. Postremo ibi vitae suae
reliquum egit, ibique sepultus est: cauto prius ut successores sui
primula inde coronam & prima imperii auspicia capescerent, quod
hodie quoque servatur, servabiturque quam diu Romani frena
Theutonica manus aget." Petrarchae Fam. Epist., lib. Ep. p. 10, et
seq., ed. 1601. ("I saw the abode of Charles, Aix, as well as his
tomb in a marble shrine, frightening to the barbarians. There from
the clergy appointed to the shrine I heard a rather amusing story
which they showed me as it had been written and which afterward I
read in a more discreet form as recounted by modern writers. I
should now like to tell it to you also provided, however, that you
do not seek verification of it from me but, as they say, from
those authors to whom it belongs. They recount that King Charles,
whom they dare equate to Pompey and Alexander by giving him the
surname [Ed. Bas nickname] of "the Great," loved a certain
ordinary woman desperately and immoderately. Overcome by her
flattery and forgetful of his reputation which he was accustomed
to cultivate carefully, and neglecting also the responsibilities
of his position, and forgetful of all other cares and even of
himself, for a long time he devoted himself exclusively to the
caresses of this woman despite the indignation and sorrow of his
people. When finally there seemed to be no hope, since his mad
love had closed his royal ears to all advice, an unforeseen death
struck the woman who had been the cause of so much evil. As a
result a wide-spread joy at first spread throughout the kingdom.
This however was followed by an even more serious concern than the
former one when the people saw their king overcome by a
frightening illness, for his madness was not mitigated by death
but instead became transferred to the foul and bloodless cadaver
which had been treated with balsam and perfumes, weighed down by
jewellery and covered with a purple shroud. Charles began
strangely fondling it night and day in an attitude of sadness and
longing. It is unnecessary to explain how unbecoming and
unpropitious us it is for a king to be a lover, for opposites can
never be joined without serious consequences. What is a kingdom if
not a just and glorious reality? By the same token what is love
but foul and unjust slavery? Therefore when embassies, governors
and other officials came to the lover or rather to the insane king
to discuss very important affairs of the kingdom, he, wretched in
his small bed, and with his doors shut and bolted, clung to the
loved body, addressing his mistress repeatedly as if she were
breathing and able to answer. He would relate to her his cares and
labours, whisper blandishments, suffer nocturnal sighs and shed
upon her constantly his tears of love. So this king who otherwise,
as they say, was most wise, chose this dreadful consolation for
his distress. The story adds something which I neither believe
could have happened nor really think I should recount, it says
that at that time there was in that court a bishop from Cologne, a
man outstanding for his sanctity and wisdom, and indeed a primary
counsellor to the king. Having seen the pitiful state of his lord,
and having noted that there was nothing that could be done by
human means he turned to God and began praying constantly. He
placed his trust in Him, and tearfully sought from Him an end of
misfortune. When he had done this for some time and seemed ready
to continue indefinitely, one day he found relief through a
miracle which became widely known. As he was offering his usual
mass and after his very devout prayers and tears which fell
copiously on his breast and on the altar, a voice was heard
echoing from heaven saying that the cause of the king's madness
lay under the tongue of the dead woman. Joyful at this news and
following the completion of the sacrificial offering he hurried to
the place where the body was. He gained admission through a right
granted him through his friendship with the king, and secretly
with his finger he felt inside the dead woman's mouth and found a
jewel encased in a very small ring under the cold stiff tongue. He
then hastened away. Shortly thereafter when Charles hurried
according to his custom to the dead woman, he was shaken by the
sight of the withered cadaver. He appeared chilled and horrified
at the contact with it and ordered it to be removed as quickly as
possible and buried. Then turning to the bishop he began to love
him, honour him, to embrace him daily more and more, and finally
to do nothing unless it was approved by him. He also refused to be
separated from him either night or day. When the good and wise man
sensed what was happening, he determined to abandon a situation
which, while perhaps desirable to most men, seemed burdensome to
him. Being worried lest it fall into the hands of others or that
it be destroyed by fire, or that it bring to his master any
danger, he threw the ring into the deep ravine of a nearby marsh.
At that time the king by chance happened to be living at Aix with
his chief men, and from that moment that seat of government became
preferred above all other cities. And no marshland became more
pleasing to him than those waters beside which he sat and which he
viewed with pleasure. Even the smell of the place came to please
him very much. Finally he transferred his abode there, and in the
middle of the marsh at an immense cost he built a palace and a
church so that nothing, either human or divine, could draw him
away from there. There he spent the remainder of his life, and
there he was buried after having carefully ordered that there his
successors be crowned and there they begin to rule. This tradition
still continues and will continue as long as the reins of the
Roman empire are in Teutonic hands." (Aldo Bernardo)-On this
story, which he found in a French author, Mr. Southey has composed
a ballad: see his Minor Poems.

99. Acon] Aachen, (Aix la Chapelle); "Acon in Almayne which is a
much fair city, where as King Charles had made his palace much
fair & rich and a right devout chapel in th'onour of our lady,
wherin himself is buried." Caxton's History and Life of Charles
the Great, &c. 1485. sig. b 7.

100. But I will make further relation
Of this isagogical collation]-isagogical collation seems to be
equivalent here to-comparison introduced, or discourse introduced
for the sake of comparison.

101. How master Gaguine, &c.] Concerning Gaguin see Some Account
of Skelton and his Writings. The passage here alluded to, will be
found in Roberti Gaguini ordinis sanctae trinitatis ministri
generalis de origine et gestis francorum perquamutile compendium,"
("A very useful compilation of the origin and deeds of the French,
by Robert Gaugin, minister-general of the Order of the Holy
Trinity") A lib. x. fol. cxiiii. (where the marginal note is
"Balluae cardinalis iniquitas" ("The wickedness of Cardinal
Ballua")), ed. 1497. Cardinal Balue (whom the reader will probably
recollect as a character in Sir W. Scott's Quentin Durward) was
confined by order of Louis XI in an iron cage at the Castle of
Loches, in which durance he remained for eleven years. But there
is no truth in Skelton's assertion that he "was headed, drawn, and
quartered," v. 737; for though be appears to have deserved that
punishment, he terminated his days prosperously in Italy.

102. a great estate] i.e. a person of great estate, or rank.

103. And to rule as him list] And might perhaps be thrown out. See
also v. 1062. As him list-i.e. as pleased him.

104. checked at the fist] Seems to be equivalent here to-attacked,
turned against the hand which fed him. "Check is when Crows,
Rooks, Pies, or other birds coming in the view of the Hawk, she
forsaketh her natural flight to fly at them." Latham's Falconry
(Explan. of Words of Art), 1658.

105. And against his lord sovereign] And perhaps ought to be
thrown out. Compare v. 1062.

106. Yet it is a wily mouse
That can build his dwelling house
Within the cat's ear] This proverbial saying occurs in a poem
attributed to Lydgate;

"An hardy mouse that is bold to breed
In cats' ears."
The Order of Fools,-MS. Harl. 2251. fol. 304.

And so Heywood;

"I have heard tell, it had need to be
A wily mouse that should breed in the cat's ear."
Dialogue, &c. sig. G 4,-Works, ed. 1598.

107. that mastiff . . .
Let him never confound
The gentle greyhound] See note 153 to Speak, Parrot.

108. Master Meautis] John Meautis was secretary for the French
language to Henry the Seventh and Henry the Eighth. It appears
from Rymer's Foedera that he was allowed, in consideration of his
services, to import Gascon wine and to dispose of it to the best
advantage, T. v. P. iv. p. 78 (anno 1494), T. vi. P. i. p. 146
(anno 1518), ed. Hagae; and that he was occasionally employed on
business with foreign powers, T. v. P. iv. pp. 110, 113 (anno
1497). Among some, says Ashmole, who became Poor Knights of
Windsor "probably out of devotion, rather than cause of poverty,"
was "John Mewtes Secretary of the French Tongue (Pat. 18. H. 7. p.
1)." Order of the Garter, p. 161. Several unimportant entries
concerning this person occur in the unpublished Books of Payments
preserved in the Chapter House, Westminster.

109. a bull under lead] lead, i.e. a leaden seal.

110. Dimmings Dale] So in Thersytes, n. d.;

"Mother Bryce of Oxford, and great Gyb of Hynxey,
Also Maud of Thrutton, and Mabel of Chartesey,
And all other witches that walk in Dimmings dale,
Clittering and clattering there your pots with ale."
p. 68. Roxb. ed.

111. Ultra Sauromatas] "Beyond the Sammatians"-a people who lived
in the steppes south-west of the Urals.

112. Mark me that chase
In the tennis play] See the latter part of note 7 to Ware the
Hawk, "Marquez bien cette chasse. Heed well that passage, mark
well the point, whereof I have informed you." Cotgrave's Dict. in
v. Chasse.

113. cinque quater trey] "Five four three".

114. Hey, the gye and the gan] In one of his copies of verses
Against Venomous Tongues, Skelton has,

"Nothing to write, but hey the guy of three."
v. 47.

where there seems to be some allusion to the dance called
heydeguies. In the present passage probably there is a play on
words: gye may mean-goose and gan gander.

115. The waters wax wan] Home Tooke in his Div. of Purley, Part
ii. p.179. ed. 1805, citing this line from the ed. of Skelton's
Works, 1736, thus, "The waters were wan," considers "wan"as the
past participle of the verb "wane,"-wand, decreased; and he is
followed by Richardson, Dict. in v. Wan. But "were" is merely a
misprint of ed. 1736; and that "wan "is here an adjective
expressing the colour of the water, is not to be doubted. So
Skelton elsewhere;

"For worldly shame I wax both wan and blo."
Magnificence, v. 2080.

"The rivers rowth, the waters wan."
Divers Ballads and Ditties Solacious, v. 15.

So too in Henry's Wallace;

"Both rochis heich, and water deep and wan."
B. vii. 814. ed. Jam.

116. De tribu Dan] "Of the tribe of Dan"

117. Palam et clam] "(both) openly and secretly"

118. cupboard] "Cupboard of plate, or to set plate upon, buffet."
Palsgrave, p. 211. It had a succession of "desks" or stages, on
which the plate was displayed: see the description of a
magnificent entertainment in Cavendish's Life. of Wolsey, p. 195.
ed. 1827, and the editor's note.

119. A goldsmith your mayor] "A.D. 1522 . . . Mayor, Sir John
Mundy, Goldsmith, Son to William Mundy of Wycombe in
Buckinghamshire." Stow's Survey, B. v. 129. ed. 1720.

120. sir Tristram] See note 83 to Philip Sparrow. The name is, of
course, used here for a person of rank generally.

121. With, laugh and lay down] A punning allusion to the game at
cards so called.

122. Spring of Langham] Langham is in Essex. In the Expenses of
Sir John Howard, first Duke of Norfolk, we find, under the year
1463, "Item, Appleton and Spring of Langham oweth my master, as
James Hoberd and young Appleton knoweth well [a blank left for the
sum]." Manners and Household Expenses of England, &c. p. 180. ed.
Roxb. It seems probable, however, from the early date, that the
person mentioned in the entry just cited was the father (or some
near relative) of the Spring noticed by Skelton. But Stow
certainly alludes to the clothier of our text, where he records
that, during the disturbances which followed the attempt to levy
money for the king's use in 1525, when the Duke of Norfolk
inquired of the rebellious party in Suffolk "what was the cause of
their disquiet, and who was their captain? . .. one John Green a
man of fifty years old answered, that poverty was both cause and
captain. For the rich clothiers Spring of Langham and other had
given over occupying, whereby they were put from their ordinary
work and living." Annales, p. 525. ed. 1615. Neither Hall nor
Holinshed, when relating the same circumstance, make any mention
of Spring.

123. He must tax for his wool] i.e. He must pay tax for his wool.

124. quia non satisfacit] "because it is not satisfactory (or
sufficient)"

125. straits of Marock] i.e. the straits of Gibraltar.

"Throughout the sea of Greece, unto the strait
Of Maroc."
Chaucer's Man of Law's Tale, v. 4884. ed. Tyr.

126. the gibbet of Baldock] See note 37 to Speak, Parrot

127. That he would then make
The devils to quake] So Roy in his satire against Wolsey, Read me,
and be not wroth, &c.;

"If he be as thou hast here said,
I ween the devils will be afraid
To have him as a companion;
For what with his execrations,
And with his terrible fulminations,
He wold handle them so,
That for very dread and fear,
All the devils that be there
Will be glad to let him go."
Harl. Miscell. ix. 29. ed. Park.

128. Bruise them on a brake] brake (which has occurred before in a
different sense, see note 44 to The Tunning of Elynour Rumming)
means here an engine of torture: "I Brake on a brake or pain bank,
as men do misdoers to confess the trouth." Palsgrave, p. 463. In
the Tower was a celebrated brake known by the nick-name of the
Duke of Exeter's Daughter: see the wood-cut in Steevens's note on
Measure for Measure,-Shakespeare (by Malone and Boswell), ix. 44.

129. a grim sire] sire i.e lord.

"Right a grim sire at doomsday shall he be."
Coventry Mysteries,-MS. Cott. Vesp. D viii. fol. 37.

130. bright and sheen] Are synonymous: yet Spenser also has;

"Her garment was so bright and wondrous sheen," &c.
The Faerie Queene,-Mutability, vii. 7.

131. The devil speed whit] See note 88 to Magnificence.

132. And with words of violence] And perhaps ought to be thrown
out. Compare v. 735.

133. For all privileged places, &c.] See note 52 to Speak, Parrot.

134. Saint Alban's to record.] Wolsey, at that time Archbishop of
York and Cardinal, was appointed to hold the abbacy of St. Alban's
in commendam; and is supposed to have applied its revenues to the
expensive public works in which he was then engaged, the building
of his colleges at Oxford and Ipswich, &c.,-a great infraction, it
was considered, of the canon law.

135. legacy] i.e. legatine power.

136. He is perjured himself, &c.] "And York [Wolsey] perceiving
the obedience that Canterbury [Warham] claimed to have of York,
intended to provide some such means that he would be superior in
dignity to Canterbury than to be either obedient or equal to him.
Wherefore he obtained first to be made Priest Cardinal, and
Legatus de Latere; unto whom the Pope sent a Cardinal's hat, with
certain bulls for his authority in that behalf. . . . Obtaining
this dignity [he] thought himself meet to encounter with
Canterbury in, his high jurisdiction before expressed; and that
also he was as meet to bear authority among the temporal powers,
as among the spiritual jurisdictions. Wherefore remembering as
well the taunts and checks before sustained of Canterbury, which
he intended to redress, having a respect to the advancement of
worldly honour, promotion, and great benefits, [he] found the
means with the king, that he was made Chancellor of England; and
Canterbury thereof dismissed, who had continued in that honourable
room and office, since long before the death of King Henry the
Seventh." Cavendish's Life of Wolsey, pp. 90, 92, ed. 1827. It
appears, however, from the contemporary testimonies of Sir Thomas
More and Ammonius, that this statement was founded on false
information, and that Wolsey did not employ any unfair means to
supersede Warham. The latter had often requested permission to
give up the chancellorship before the king would receive his
resignation. When the seals were tendered to the Cardinal, either
from affected modesty, or because he thought the office
incompatible with his other duties, he declined the offer, and
only accepted it after the king's repeated solicitations. See
Singer's note on Cavendish, ubi supra, and Lingard's Hist. of
Engl. vi. 57. ed. 8vo.

137. he setteth never a deal
By his former oath] i.e. he values not a bit, regards not a bit,
his former oath.

138. Ecce, sacerdos magnus]"Behold, the great priest"

139. That will head us and hang us, . . . an he may fang us!]-
fang, i.e. catch, lay hold of. Compare Sir D. Lyndsay's Satire of
the Three Estates, Part ii.;

"Some says ane king is come amang us,
That purposes to head and hang us:
There is no grace, if he may fang us,
But on an pin."
Works, ii. 81. ed. Chalmers.

140. in causa sanguinis] "in a case of blood" i.e. in a criminal
case which could result in a death sentence. Ecclesiastics were
not supposed to sentence a man to death.

141. Naman Sirus] i.e. Naaman the Syrian (in Luke iv. 27)

"And Naaman Sirus thou purgedest of a leprosy."
Bale's Promises of God, &c. 1538. sig. E i.

142. pocky] i.e. poxy, infected with syphilis. So Roy in his
satire against Wolsey, Read me, and be not wroth, &c.;

"He had the pox, without fail,
Wherefore people on him did rail
With many opprobrious mocks."
Hart. Miscell. ix. 32. ed. Park.

This was one of the charges afterwards brought against Wolsey in
parliament.

143. manus Domini] "The hand of God."

144. Balthazar] "Balthazar de Geurcis was Chirurgeon to Queen
Catharine of Arragon, and received letters of naturalization,
dated 16 March, 13 Hen. 8. [1521-2]. See Rymer's Collect. ined.
MS. Add. Brit. Mus. 4621.10." Sir F. Madden's additional note on
Privy Purse Expenses of the Princess Mary, p. 281. He is mentioned
in a letter from Wolsey's physician, Dr. Augustine (Augustinus de
Augustinis, a Venetian), to Thomas Cromwell, requiring medical
assistance for the Cardinal. MS. Cott. Tit. B i. fol. 365.

145. Domingo Lomelin, &c.] In The Privy Purse Expenses of King
Henry the Eighth are several entries, relating to payments of
money won by this Lombard from the King at cards and dice,
amounting, in less than three years, to above 620l.: see pp. 17,
32, 33, 37, 190, 204, 205, 267, 270 of that work, edited by Sir H.
Nicolas, who observes (p. 316) that Domingo "was, like Palmer and
others, one of Henry's 'diverting vagabonds,' and seems to have
accompanied His Majesty wherever he went, for we find that he was
with him at Calais in October, 1532."

146. Quia difficile est
Satiram non scribere] "Because it is difficult not to write
satire" (Juvenal, Sat. i. 30)

147. Omne animi vitium, &c.] "Every vice of the soul &c."
(Juvenal, Sat. viii. x 40).

148.smegma non est cinnamonum] "Soap is not cinnamon"

149. de absentibus nil nisi bonum.] "(speak) nothing but good of
the absent"



THE DOUGHTY DUKE OF ALBANY

[From Marshe's ed. of Skelton's Works, 1568.]

HOW THE DOUGHTY DUKE OF ALBANY, LIKE A COWARD KNIGHT, RAN AWAY
SHAMEFULLY, WITH AN HUNDRED THOUSAND TRATTLING SCOTS AND FAINT-
HEARTED FRENCHMEN, BESIDE THE WATER OF TWEED.

<1>

Rejoice, England,
And understand
These tidings new,
Which be as true
As the gospel:
This duke so fell
Of Albany,
So cowardly,
With all his host
Of the Scottish coast,                                         10
For all their boast,
Fled like a beast;
Wherefore to jest
Is my delight
Of this coward knight,
And for to write
In the despite 
Of the Scots' rank
Of Huntley bank,< >
Of Lothian,                                                    20
Of Loch Ryan,
And the ragged ray<3>
Of Galloway.

Dunbar, Dundee,
Ye shall trow me,
False Scots are ye:
Your hearts sore fainted,
And so attainted,<4>
Like cowards stark,
At the castle of Wark,                                         30
By the water of Tweed,
Ye had evil speed;
Like cankered curs,
Ye lost your spurs,
For in that fray
Ye ran away,
With, hey, dog, hey!<5>
For Sir William Lyle<6>
Within short while,
That valiant knight,                                           40
Put you to flight;
By his valiance
Two thousand of France
There he put back,
To your great lack,
And utter shame
Of your Scottish name.
Your chief chieftain,
Void of all brain,
Duke of all Albany,                                            50
Then shamefully
He reculed back,
To his great lack,
When he heard tell
That my Lord Admiral<7>
Was coming down
To make him frown
And to make him lour,
With the noble power
Of my lord cardinal,                                           60
As an host royal,
After the ancient manner,
With Saint Cuthbert's banner,<8>
And Saint William's also;
Your captain ran to go,
To go, to go, to go,
And brake up all his host;
For all his crake and boast,
Like a coward knight
He fled and durst not fight,                                   70
He ran away by night.

But now must I
Your Duke ascry
Of Albany
With a word or twain
In sentence plain.

Ye duke so doughty,
So stern, so stouty,
In short sentence,                                             80
Of your pretence
What is the ground,
Briefly and round
To me expound,
Or else will I
Evidently
Shew as it is;
For the cause is this,
How ye pretend
For to defend
The young Scottish king,                                       90
But ye mean a thing,<9>
An ye could bring
The matter about,
To put his eyes out
And put him down,
And set his crown
On your own head
When he were dead.
Such treachery
And traitory                                                  100
Is all your cast;
Thus ye have compassed
With the French king
A false reckoning
To invade England,
As I understand:
But our king royall,
Whose name over all,
Noble Henry the Eight,
Shall cast a bight,<10>                                       110
And set such a snare
That shall cast you in care,
Both King Francis and thee,
That know ye shall be
For the most recrayed
Cowards afraid,
And falsest forsworn,
That ever were born.

O ye wretched Scots,
Ye puant piss pots,                                           120
It shall be your lots
To be knit up with knots
Of halters and ropes
About your traitors' throats!
O Scots perjured,
Unhappy ured,
Ye may be assured
Your falsehood discured
It is and shall be
From the Scottish sea                                         130
Unto Gabione!
For ye be false each one,
False and false again,
Never true nor plain,
But fleer, flatter, and feign,
And ever to remain
In wretched beggary
And mangy misery,
In lousy loathsomeness
And scabbed surfiness,                                        140
And in abomination
Of all manner of nation,
Nation most in hate,
Proud and poor of state.
Twit, Scot, go keep thy den,
Mell not with English men;
Thou did nothing but bark
At the castle of Wark.
Twit, Scot, yet again once,
We shall break thy bones,                                     150
And hang you upon poles, 
And burn you all to coals;
With, twit Scot, twit Scot, twit,
Walk, Scot, go beg a bit
Of bread at ilka man's heck!
The fiend, Scot, break thy neck!
Twit, Scot, again I say,
Twit, Scot of Galloway,
Twit, Scot, shake thy dog, hey!<11>
Twit, Scot, thou ran away.                                    160

We set not a fly
By your Duke of Albany;<12>
We set not a prawn
By such a drunken drone;
We set not a mite
By such a coward knight,
Such a proud palliard,
Such a skyrgaliard,
Such a stark coward,
Such a proud poltroon,                                        170
Such a foul custron,
Such a doughty dagswane;<13>
Send him to France again,
To bring with him more brain
From King Francis of France:
God send them both mischance!

Ye Scots all the rabble,
Ye shall never be able
With us for to compare;
What though ye stamp and stare?                               180
God send you sorrow and care!
With us whenever ye mell,
Yet we bear away the bell,
When ye cankered knaves
Must creep into your caves
Your heads for to hide,
For ye dare not abide.

Sir Duke of Albany,
Right inconveniently
Ye rage and ye rave,                                          190
And your worship deprave:<14>
Not like Duke Hamilcar,
With the Romans that made war,
Nor like his son Hanibal,
Nor like Duke Hasdrubal<15>
Of Carthage in Afric;
Yet somewhat ye be like
In some of their conditions,
And their false seditions,
And their dealing double,                                     200
And their wayward trouble:
But yet they were bold,
And manly manifold,
Their enemies to assail
In plain field and battle;
But ye and your host,
Full of brag and boast,
And full of waste wind,
How ye will bears bind,<16>
And the devil down ding,                                      210
Yet ye dare do nothing
But leap away like frogs,
And hide you under logs,
Like pigs and like hogs,
And like mangy dogs.

What an army were ye?
Or what activity
Is in you, beggars' brawls,
Full of scabs and scawls,
Of vermin and of lice,                                        220
And of all manner vice?

Sir Duke, nay, Sir Duck,
Sir Drake of the Lake, Sir Duck
Of the Dunghill, for small luck
Ye have in feats of war;
Ye make nought but ye mar;
Ye are a false intruser,<17>
And a false abuser,
And an untrue knight;
Thou hast too little might                                    230
Against England to fight.
Thou art a graceless wight
To put thyself to flight:
A vengeance and despite
On thee must needs light,
That durst not bide the sight
Of my Lord Admiral,
Of chivalry the well,
Of knighthood the flower
In every martial shower,                                      240
The noble Earl of Surrey,
That put thee in such fray;
Thou durst no field derain,
Nor no battle maintain
Against our strong captain,
But thou ran home again
For fear thou should be slain,
Like a Scottish cateran
That durst abide no reckoning;
Thy heart would not serve thee:                               250
The fiend of hell mote starve thee!<18>

No man hath heard
Of such a coward,
And such a mad image
Carried in a cage,<19>
As it were a cottage;
Or of such a maumet
Carried in a tent;
In a tent! nay, nay,
But in a mountain gay,                                        260
Like a great hill
For a windmill,
Therein to couch still,
That no man him kill;
As it were a goat
In a sheep-cote,
About him a park
Of a mad wark,
Men call it a toil;
Therein, like a roil,                                         270
Sir Duncan, ye dared,<20>
And thus ye prepared
Your carcass to keep,
Like a silly sheep,
A sheep of Cotswold,
From rain and from cold,
And from raining of raps,
And such after-claps;
Thus in your cowardly castle
Ye decked you to dwell:                                       280
Such a captain of horse,
It made no great force
If that ye had ta'en
Your last deadly bane
With a gun-stone,
To make you to groan.
But hide thee, Sir Topias,<21>
Now into the castle of Bass,<22>
And lurk there, like an ass,
With some Scottish lass<23>                                   290
With dugs, dugs, dugs:
I shrew thy Scottish lugs,
Thy munpyns,<24> and thy crag,
For thou cannot but brag,
Like a Scottish hag:
Adieu now, Sir Wrig-wrag,
Adieu, Sir Dalyrag!<25>
Thy melling is but mocking;
Thou mayst give up thy cocking,
Give it up, and cry creak,                                    300
Like an hoddypeak.

Whereto should I more speak
Of such a farly freke,
Of such an hornkeck,
Of such a bold captain,
That dare not turn again,
Nor durst not crack a word,
Nor durst not draw his sword
Against the Lion White,<26>
But ran away quite?                                           310
He ran away by night,
In the owl flight,
Like a coward knight.
Adieu, coward, adieu,
False knight, and most untrue!
I render thee, false rebel,
To the flingande fiend<27> of hell.

Hark yet, Sir Duke, a word,
In earnest or in bourd:
What, have ye, villain, forged,                               320
And virulently disgorged,
As though ye would parbrake,
Your avaunts<28> to make,
With words embossed,
Ungraciously engrossed,
How ye will undertake
Our royal king to make
His own realm to forsake?
Such lewd language ye spake.
Sir Duncan, in the devil way,                                 330
Be well ware what ye say:
Ye say that he and ye,-
Which he and ye? let see;
Ye mean Francis, French king,
Should bring about this thing.
I say, thou lewd lurdain,
That neither of you twain
So hardy nor so bold
His countenance to behold:
If our most royal Harry                                       340
List with you to warray,
Full soon ye should miscarry,
For ye durst not tarry
With him to strive a stound;
If he on you but frowned,
Not for a thousand pound,
Ye durst bide on the ground,
Ye would run away round,
And cowardly turn your backs,
For all your comely cracks,                                   350
And, for fear percase
To look him in the face
Ye would defile the place,
And run your way apace.
Though I trim you this trace
With English somewhat base,
Yet, save voster grace,<29>
Thereby I shall purchase
No displeasant reward,
If ye well can regard                                         360
Your cankered cowardness
And your shameful doubleness.

Are ye not frantic mad,
And wretchedly bestad,
To rail against his grace,
That shall bring you full base,
And set you in such case
That between you twain
There shall be drawn a train
That shall be to your pain?                                   370
To fly ye shall be fain.
And never turn again.

What, would Francis, our friar,
Be such a false liar,
So mad a cordelier,
So mad a murmurer?
Ye muse somewhat too far;
All out of joint ye jar:
God let you never thrive!
Ween ye, dawcocks, to drive                                   380
Our king out of his realm?
Gae hame, rank Scot, gae hame,<30>
With fond Francis, French king:
Our master shall you bring
I trust, to low estate,
And mate you with checkmate.<31>

Your brains are idle;
It is time for you to bridle,
And pipe in a quibible;<32>
For it is impossible                                          390
For you to bring about,
Our king for to drive out
Of this his realm royal
And land imperial;
So noble a prince as he
In all activity
Of hardy martial acts,
Fortunate in all his facts.

And now I will me dress
His valiance to express,                                      400
Though insufficient am I
His Grace to magnify
And laud equivalently;
Howbeit, loyally,
After mine allegiance,
My pen I will advance
To extol his noble Grace,
In spite of thy coward's face,
In spite of King Francis,
Devoid of all noblesse,                                       410
Devoid of good courage,
Devoid of wisdom sage,
Mad, frantic, and savage;
Thus he doth disparage
His blood with fond dotage.
A prince to play the page
It is reckless rage,
And a lunatic overage. <33> 
What though my style be rude?
With truth it is ennewed:                                     420
Truth ought to be rescued,
Truth should not be subdued.

But now will I expound
What nobleness doth abound,
And what honour is found,
And what virtues be resident
In our royal regent,
Our peerless president,
Our king most excellent:

In martial prowess                                            430
Like unto Hercules;<34>
In prudence and wisdom
Like unto Solomon;
In his goodly person
Like unto Absolon;
In loyalty and foy
Like to Hector of Troy;
And his glory to increase,
Like to Scipiades;<35>
In royal majesty                                              440
Like unto Ptolemy,
Like to Duke Josue,<36>
And the valiant Machube;<37>
That if I would report
All the royal sort
Of his nobility,
His magnanimity,
His animosity,
His frugality,
His liberality,                                               450
His affability,
His humanity,
His stability,
His humility,
His benignity,
His royal dignity,
My learning is too small
For to recount them all.

What losels then are ye,
Like cowards as ye be,                                        460
To rail on his estate,
With words inordinate!

He rules his commonalty 
With all benignity;
His noble baronage,
He putteth them in courage
To exploit deeds of arms,
To the damage and harms
Of such as be his foes;
Wherever he rides or goes,                                    470
His subjects he doth support,
Maintain them with comfort
Of his most princely port,
As all men can report.

Then ye be a knappish sort,<38>
Et faitez a luy grant torte,<39>
With your enbosed jaws
To rail on him like daws;
The fiend scratch out your maws!

All his subjects and he                                       480
Most lovingly agree 
With whole heart and true mind,
They find his Grace so kind;
Wherewith he doth them bind
At all hours to be ready
With him to live and die,
And to spende their heart-blood,
Their bodies and their good,
With him in all distress,
Alway in readiness                                            490
To assist his noble Grace;
In spite of thy coward's face,
Most false attainted traitor,
And false foresworn faitor.

Avaunt, coward recrayed!
Thy pride shall be allayed;
With Sir Francis of France
We shall pipe you a dance,
Shall turn you to mischance.

I rede you, look about;                                       500
For ye shall be driven out
Of your land in short space:
We will so follow in the chase
That ye shall have no grace
For to turn your face;
And thus, Saint George to borrow,<40>
Ye shall have shame and sorrow.

L'ENVOY

Go, little quaire, quickly;
Show them that shall you read
How that ye are likely                                        510
Over all the world to spread.
The false Scots for dread,
With the Duke of Albany,
Beside the water of Tweed
They fled full cowardly.
Though your English be rude,
Barren of eloquence,
Yet, briefly to conclude,
Grounded is your sentence
On truth, under defence                                       520
Of all true Englishmen,
This matter to credence
That I wrote with my pen.

SKELTON LAUREATE, OBSEQUIOUS ET LOYAL.
TO MY LORD CARDINAL'S RIGHT NOBLE GRACE, ETC.<41>

L'ENVOY

Go, little quaire, apace,
In most humble wise,
Before his noble grace,
That caused you to devise
This little enterprise;
And him most lowly pray,
In his mind to comprise                                       530
Those words his grace did say
Of an amice gray.

Je foy enterment en sa bone grace.<42>



NOTES TO THE DOUGHTY DUKE OF ALBANY.

1. John duke of Albany (son of Alexander duke of Albany, the
brother of James the Third) was regent of Scotland during the
minority of James the Fifth; and this poem relates to his invasion
of the borders in 1523; an expedition, which, according to
Pinkerton, "in its commencement only displays the regent's
imprudence, and in its termination his total deficiency in
military talents, and even in common valour." Hist. of Scot., ii.
230. Mr. Tytler, however, views the character and conduct of
Albany in a very different light; and his account of the
expedition (Hist. of Scot., v. 166 sqq.) may be thus abridged.
Albany's army amounted in effective numbers to about forty
thousand men, not including a large body of camp-followers. With
this force,-his march impeded by heavy roads, the nobles corrupted
by the gold and intrigues of England, they and their soldiers
jealous of the foreign auxiliaries, and symptoms of
disorganization early appearing,-the regent advanced as far as
Melrose. Having vainly endeavoured to persuade his discontented
army to cross the Tweed, he encamped on its left bank, and laid
siege to Wark Castle with his foreign troops and artillery. There
the Frenchmen manifested their wonted courage; but the assaulting
party, receiving no assistance from the Scots, and fearing that
the river flooded by rain and snow would cut off their retreat,
were obliged to raise the siege, and join the main body. The Earl
of Surrey (see notes 102 to The Garland of Laurel and 29 to Why
Come ye not to Court?), who had in the meanwhile concentrated his
troops, hearing of the attack on Wark Castle, now advanced against
the enemy. At the news of his approach, the Scottish nobles being
fixed in their resolution not to risk a battle, Albany retreated
to Eccles, (a monastery six miles distant from Wark,) with his
foreign auxiliaries and artillery; and the rest of his forces
dispersed, rather with flight than retreat, amidst a tempest of
snow. From Eccles Albany retired to Edinburgh, and, soon after,
finally withdrew to France. His army had been assembled on the
Burrow-Muir near Edinburgh towards the end of October; and its
dispersion took place at the commencement of the following month.

2. Huntley Bank] See note 25 to Against the Scots

3. the ragged ray]-ray seems here to be merely-array; but Skelton
in his Replication, &c., has,

"That ye dance all in a suit
The heretics' ragged ray."
v. 168.

and see note 85 to Poems Against Garnesche.

4. And so attainted] Qy. "sore attainted"?

5. With, hey, dog, hey] This line has occurred before, in Elynour
Rumming, v. 168.

6. For Syr William Lyle, &c.] "And the said Monday at iij a clock
at after noon, the water of Tweed being so high that it could not
be ridden, the Duke sent over ij m. (2000) Frenchmen in boats to
give assault to the place, who with force entered the bas courte
("lower courtyard"), and by Sir William Lisle captain of the
castle with c. (100) with him were right manfully defended by the
space of one hour and an half without suffering them to enter the
inner ward; but finally the said French men entered the inner
ward, which perceived by the said Sir William and his company
freely set upon them, and not only drove them out of the inner
ward, but also out of the outer ward, and slew of the said
Frenchmen x (10) persons. And so the said French men went over the
water," &c. Letter from Surrey to Henry the Eighth,-MS. Cott.
Calig. B. vi. fol. 304. Mr. Tytler says that the assaulting party
left "three hundred slain, of which the greater number were
Frenchmen." Hist. of Scot., v. 165.

7. my lord admiral] i.e. the Earl of Surrey.

8. With Saint Cuthbert's banner] An earlier passage of the letter
just cited is as follows. "At which time I being at Holy Island,
vij (7) miles from Berwick, was advertised of the same [Albany's
attack on Wark Castle] at v a clock at night the said Sunday; and
incontinent sent letters to my lord cardinal's company, my lord of
Northumberland, my lord of Westmoreland at Saint Cuthbert's banner
lying at Alnwick and thereabouts, and in likewise to my lord Dacre
and other lords and gentlemen lying abroad in the country to meet
me at Barmer Wood v miles from Wark on Monday, who so did."

9. But ye mean a thing, &c.] That Albany aimed at the destruction
of James V. was a popular rumour, but, according to Mr. Tytler,
entirely without foundation.

10. bight] i.e., perhaps noose. Beight,bight, or bought, is any
thing bent, folded: in Markham's Masterpiece (as Stevenson
observes, Additions to Boucher's Gloss. in v. ) it is used both to
express a noose formed of a rope, and the bent or arched part of a
horse's neck. In Hormanni Vulgaria we find "Boughtes. . . .
Chartae complicatae." ("folded papers") Sig. Q iii. ed. 1530.

11. shake thy dog, hey!] Qy "thee, dog?" but see note 10 to Verses
Against Dundas.

12. We set not a fly
By, &c.] i.e. We value not a fly, care not a fly for.

13. dagswayne] Normally means "A coverlet of coarse cloth." I know
not if the word was ever used as a term of reproach by any writer
except Skelton.

14. Right inconveniently,
Ye rage and ye rave,
And your worship deprave]-inconveniently, i.e. unsuitably,
unbecomingly: your worship deprave, i.e. debase, degrade, lower
your dignity. "I am also advertised that he [Albany] is so
passionate that an he be apart amongst his familiars and doth hear
any thing contrarious to his mind and pleasure, his accustomed
manner is to take his bonnet suddenly off his head and to throw it
in the fire, and no man dare take it out but let it to be brent.
My lord Dacre doth affirm that at his last being in Scotland he
did burn above a dozen bonnets after that manner." Letter from
Lord Surrey to Wolsey,-MS. Cott., Calig. B vi. fol. 316.

15. Duke Hamilcar. . . Duke Hasdrubal-Duke, i.e. leader, lord. So
Lydgate;

"Duke whilom of Carthage
Called Hamilcar."
Fall of Princes, B. v. leaf cxxvi. ed. Wayland.

"Duke Hasdrubal, whom books magnify."
Ibid. B. ii. leaf xlv.

16. How ye will bears bind] Compare;

"With meed men may bind bears."
Coventry Mysteries,-MS. Cott. Vesp. D viii. fol. 195.

"Some man is strong bears for to bind."
Lydgate's verses Against Self-love, &c.-MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 10.

"That with the strength of my hand
Bears may bind."
The Droichis Part of the Play, attributed to Dunbar,-Poems, ii. 37.
ed. Laing.

"Making the people to believe he could bind bears."
Bale's King Johan, p. 72. ed. Camd.

17. intruser] i.e. intruder.

"But an intruser, one called Julian."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. viii. leaf ii. ed. Wayland.

18. The fiend of hell mote starve thee] i.e. May the fiend of hell
cause thee to die, destroy thee. (To starve in our old writers is
common in the sense of-die, perish).

19. Carried in a cage, &c.] In no historian can I find any
allusion to the strange vehicle here mentioned.

20. Therein, like a roil,
Sir Duncan, ye dared] Compare;

"By your revellous riding on every roil, 
Well-nigh every day a new mare or a moyle."
Heywood's Dialogue, &c. sig. H 4,-Works, ed. 1598.

"Nulla in tam magno est corpore mica salis, There is not one crumb
or drop of good fashion in all that great roil's body. For
Catullus there speaketh of a certain maiden that was called
Quintia," &c. Udall's Flowers, or Eloquent Phrases of the Latin
speech, &c. sig. G 5. ed. 1581. Grose gives "Roil or royle, a big
ungainly slamakin, a great awkward blowze or hoyden." Prov.
Gloss.:-Sir Duncan is a Scottish name used here at random by
Skelton, as he elsewhere uses other Scottish names, see note 18 to
Against The Scots. Dared [lurked, lay hid], see note 124 to
Magnificence; and compare; "Daren or privily been hid. Latito."
Prompt. Parv. ed. 1499.

"Under fresh flowers sweet and fair to see,
The serpent dareth with his covert poison."
Lydgate's Fall of Princes, B. iv. leaf cvii. ed. Wayland.

"the snail goeth low down,
Dareth in his shell."
Poem by Lydgate entitled in the Catalogue, Advices for people to
keep a guard over their tongues,-MS. Harl. 2255. fol. 133.

21. sir Thopas] See note 19 to Poems Against Garnesche.

22. Bass] The Bass is an island, or rather rock, of immense height
in the Firth of Forth, about a mile distant from the south shore.

23. lass] "as" in MS. I may just notice, in support of this
reading, that "a lusty lass" occurs in our author's Magnificence,
v. 1577

24. munpyns] Compare;

"Sirs, let us crib first for one thing or other,
That these words be pursed, and let us go fodder
Our munpyns."
Prima Pastorum,-Towneley Mysteries, p. 89,

(a passage which the writer of the Gloss. altogether
misunderstands), and;

"Thy munpyns ben like old ivory,
Here are stumps feeble and here are none," &c.
Lydgate, The Prohemy of a Marriage, &c.-MS. Harl. 372. fol. 45.

Munpyns is, I apprehend, mouth-pins, teeth. Ray gives "The Munne,
the Mouth." Coll. of Engl. Words, &c.-Preface, p. x. ed. 1768: and
Jamieson has "Munds. The mouth."-"Muns. The hollow behind the jaw-
bone." Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang. and Suppl.

25. sir Wrig-wrag . . . sir Dalyrag] See note 53 to Poems Against
Garnesche

26. the Lion White] i.e. the Earl of Surrey. See note 21 to
Against The Scots.

27. the flingande fiend] i.e. the flinging fiend. So in Ingelend's
Disobedient Child, n. d.;

The flyinge and [sic] fiend go with my wife."
Sig. F ii.

Northern readers at least need not be informed that to fling
means-to throw out the legs;

"Sometime, in dancing, fairly I flang."
Sir D. Lyndsay's Epistle before his Dream,-Works, i. 187. ed.
Chalmers.

28. avaunts] i.e. vaunts, boasts. "The bragging avaunts of the
Spaniards be so accalmed," &c. Letter of Wolsey,-Burnet's Hist. of
the Reform., iii. P. ii. 9. ed. 1816.

29. save voster grace] "despite your grace."

30. Gae hame] Scottice for-Go home-as before in Why Come Ye Not To
Court, v. 123.

31. mate you with checkmate] In allusion to the king's being put
in check at the game of chess.

32. pipe in a quibible] The word quibible, as far as I am aware,
occurs only in Skelton. Chaucer has a well-known passage,

"And playen songs on a small ribible;
Thereto he sang sometime a loud quinible."
The Miller's tale, v. 3331

where Tyrwhitt (apparently against the context) supposes quinible
to be an instrument: and I may notice that Forby gives "Whybibble,
a whimsy; idle fancy; silly scruple, &c." Voc. of East Anglia.

33. overage] Over-rage, excessive rage. See note 4 to Why Come Ye
Not To Court.

34. Like unto Hercules] Barclay goes still farther in a compliment
to the same monarch;

"He passeth Hercules in manhood and courage."
The Ship of Fools, fol. 205. ed. 1570.

35. Scipiades] i.e. Scipio.

36. Duke Josue]-Duke, i.e. leader, lord. So Hawes;

"And in like wise duke Josue the gent," &c.
The Pastime of Pleasure, sig. c ii. ed. 1555.

37. the valiant Machube] i.e. Maccabee.

38. a knappish sort] "Knappish. Proterve, pervers, fascheux."
("Obstinate, contrary, angry") Cotgrave's Dict. "Knappish. Tart,
testy, snappish." Jamieson's Et. Dict. of Scot. Lang.: sort, i.e.
set.

39. Et faitez a luy grant torte] "And do him a great injury"

40. Saint George to borrow] i.e. St. George being my surety or
pledge: the expression is common in our early poetry.

41. Skelton Laureat, obsequious et loyal, &c] Perhaps these words
are a portion of the superscription to the L'envoy which follows.
The L'envoy itself does not, I apprehend, belong to the poem on
the Duke of Albany. See Some Account of Skelton and his Writings.

42. Je foy enterment en sa bone grace.] "I trust entirely in his
good graces" (PH)



A LAUD AND PRAISE MADE FOR OUR SOVEREIGN LORD THE KING.

[This title (in a different handwriting from that of the poem) is
the endorsement of the MS., which consists of two leaves, bound up
in the volume marked B. 2. 8, (pp. 67-69) among the Records of the
Treasury of the Receipt of the Exchequer, now at the Rolls House.
[Printed for the first time by Dyce, from a manuscript discovered
by Mr. W. H. Black.] Qy. is this poem the piece which, in the
catalogue of his own writings, Skelton calls "The Book of the
Rosiar," Garland of Laurel, v. 1178.

THE Rose both White and Red<1>
In one Rose now doth grow;
Thus through every stead
Thereof the fame doth blow:
Grace the seed did sow:
England, now gather flowers,
Exclude now all dolours.

Noble Henry the eight,<2>
Thy loving sovereign lord,
Of kings' line most straight,                                  10
His title doth record:
In whom doth well acord
Alexis young of age,
Adrastus wise and sage.

Astrea, Justice hight,<3>
That from the starry sky
Shall now come and do right,
This hundred year scantly
A man could not espy
That Right dwelt us among,                                     20
And that was the more wrong:

Right shall the foxes chare,<4>
The wolves, the bears also,
That wrought have much care,
And brought England in woe:
They shall worry no mo,
Nor root the Rosary
By extort treachery:

Of this our noble king<5>
The law they shall not break;                                  30
They shall come to reckoning;
No man for them will speak:
The people durst not creke
Their griefs to complain,
They brought them in such pain:

Therefore no more they shall<6>
The commons overbace,
That wont were over all
Both lord and knight to face;
For now the years of grace                                     40
And wealth are come again,
That maketh England fain.

Adonis of fresh colour,<7>
Of youth the godly flower,
Our prince of high honour,
Our paves, our succour,
Our king, our emperor,
Our Priamus of Troy,
Our wealth, our worldly joy;

Upon us he doth reign, <8>
That maketh our hearts glad,
As king most sovereign                                         50
That ever England had;
Demure, sober, and sad,
And Martis' lusty knight;<9>
God save him in his right!
Amen.

Bien men sovient.<10>

Per me laurigerum Britonum Skeltonida vatem.<11>



NOTES TO A LAUD AND PRAISE &C.

1. THE Rose both White and Red] Side note: candida, punica, &c.
"White, red, &c."

2. Noble Henry the eight] Side Note: Nobilis Henricus, &c. "Noble
Henry, &c."

3. Astrea, Justice hight] Side note: Sedibus aetheriis, &c. "From
the throne of heaven, &c."

4. Right shall the foxes chare] Side note: Arcebit vulpes, &c. "He
will cage the foxes, &c."

5. Of this our noble king] Side note: Ne tanti regis, &c. "Not of
such a king, &c."

6. Therefore no more they shall] Side note: Ecce Platonis secla,
&c "Behold the age of Plato, &c."

7. Adonis of fresh colour] Side note: Rediit jam pulcher Adonis
&c. "He has now brought back the beauty of Adonis.

8. Upon us he doth reign] Side note: Anglorum radians, &c. "The
shining light of the English People, &c."

9. Martis' lusty knight] i.e. vigorous knight of Mars (warrior).

10. Bien men sovient.] "Well remembered". These words are followed
in the MS. by a sort of flourished device, which might perhaps be
read-"Deo (21) gratias." (Thanks be to God")

11. Per me laurigerum Britonum Skeltonida vatem.] "By me, Skelton,
Poet Laureate of Britain"

THE END

-636-
